--- [Page 1] ---
THE 
CREATM 
SOUTH 

--- [Page 2] ---
The ISEAS  – Yusof I shak Institute (formerly Institute of Southeast Asian Studies) is an autonomous organization 
established in 1968. It is a regional centre dedicated to the study of socio-political, security, and economic trends 
and developments in Southeast Asia and its wider geostrategic and economic environment. The Institute’s 
research programmes are grouped under Regional Economic Studies (RES), Regional Strategic and Political Studies (RSPS), and Regional Social and Cultural Studies (RSCS). The Institute is also home to the ASEAN 
Studies Centre (ASC), the Singapore APEC Study Centre, and the Temasek History Research Centre (THRC).
ISEAS Publishing, an established academic press, has issued more than 2,000 books and journals. It is 
the largest scholarly publisher of research about Southeast Asia from within the region. ISEAS Publishing works with many other academic and trade publishers and distributors to disseminate important research and analyses from and about Southeast Asia to the rest of the world.
00_CreSouth V1_FM_8P_9Mar22.indd   2 9/3/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 3] ---


--- [Page 4] ---
First published in Singapore in 2022 by ISEAS Publishing
ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute
30 Heng Mui Keng TerraceSingapore 119614
E-mail: publish@iseas.edu.sg
Website : http://bookshop.iseas.edu.sg
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute.
© 2022 ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute
The responsibility for facts and opinions in this publication rests exclusively with the authors and their interpretations do not necessarily reflect the views or the policy of the publishers or their supporters.
ISEAS Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Name(s): 
 Acri, An
drea, 1981-, editor. | Sharrock, Peter D., editor. 
Title:  The crea
tive south : Buddhist and Hindu art in mediaeval maritime Asia / edited by Andrea 
Acri and Peter Sharrock.
Description:  Singa
pore : ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, 2022. | Includes bibliographical references and 
index.
Identifiers:  ISBN 9
78-981-4951-48-7 (soft cover ; Volume 1) | ISBN 978-981-4951-49-4 (pdf ; Volume 1) | 
ISBN 978-981-4951-51-7 (soft cover ; Volume 2) | ISBN 978-981-4951-52-4 (pdf ; Volume 2)
Subjects:  LCSH: A
rt, Medieval—Asia—History. | Buddhist art—Asia—History. | Hindu art—Asia—
History.
Classification: LCC N8191 A8C91
Cover design by Lee Meng HuiTypesetting by International Typesetters Pte LtdPrinted in Singapore by Markono Print Media Pte Ltd
00_CreSouth V1_FM_8P_9Mar22.indd   4 9/3/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 5] ---
1. Introduction: Volume 1: Intra-Asian Transfers and Mainland Southeast Asia  1 
Andre
a Acri and Peter Sharrock
PART I:  
INFLUENCES FROM THE SOUTH
2. From Me
layu to Thamel and Back: The Transmigration of the  9 
Eight-
Armed Amoghapāśa
 Iain Si
nclair
3. In the Fo
otsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774): Southern Indian Artistic Mode in  66 
Tang Ch
ina and its Transmission to Tibet
 Yury Kh
okhlov
4. Heruk
a-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia  126 
 Peter S
harrock
PART II:  
TRANSFERS AND INNOVATIONS IN MAINLAND SOUTHEAST ASIA
5. Godde
ss Prajñ āpāramit
ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarman VII’s Angkor  167 
Jinah K
im
6. Dance
rs, Musicians, Ascetics, and Priests: Performance-based Śaiva Worship  192
 and its De
velopment in the Temple Cults of Angkor
 Swati Ch
emburkar
7. Libra
ries or Fire Shrines? Reinterpreting the Function of ‘Annex Buildings’  222
 in Khme
r Śaiva Temples from the Prism of Early Śaivism
 Shiva
ni Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier CuninContE nts
00_CreSouth V1_FM_8P_9Mar22.indd   5 9/3/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 6] ---
Contents6
8. Śaiva  Religious Iconography: Dancing Śiva in Multi-Polity Medieval Campā  289
 Mai Bùi Diệ
u Linh
9. The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā and its Relationship  305
 to Cour
tly Culture in Cambodia, East Java, and China
 Mya Cha
u
10. On the Chronological Interrelationship between Newly Found Inscriptions  334
 and the T
emple Architecture of Campā: The Hòa Lai and Po Dam Sites
 Trần  Kỳ Ph
ương
The Contributors  359
Index  362
00_CreSouth V1_FM_8P_9Mar22.indd   6 9/3/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 7] ---
Chapter 1
Introduction
Volume 1: Intra-Asian Transfers and Mainland Southeast Asia
Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock
This edited volume is the first of two forming 
an anthology that programmatically recon-
siders the creative contribution of the littoral 
and insular regions of Maritime Asia—Southeast 
Asia in the first place—to shaping new paradigms 
in the Buddhist and Hindu art and architecture of 
the mediaeval Asian world.1 Far from being a mere 
southern conduit for the maritime circulation of 
Indic religions, in the period from ca. the 7th to 
the 14th century those regions transformed across 
mainland and island polities the rituals, icons, and 
architecture that embodied these religious insights 
with a dynamism that often eclipsed the established 
cultural centres in Northern India, Central Asia, 
and mainland China. This collective body of work 
brings together new research aiming to recali -
brate the importance of these innovations in art 
and architecture, thereby highlighting the cultur-
al creativity of the monsoon-influenced Southern 
rim of the Asian landmass. This approach aims 
at favouring the integration of these findings into 
the mainstream academic discourse pertaining to 
various disciplines, such as Art History, Archaeol-
ogy, Religious Studies and Textual Studies, which 
too often have ignored the constitutive role played 
by the (supposedly ‘peripheral’) maritime regions in 
1. Adhering to the same intellectual agenda, this anthol -
ogy can be considered a ‘sequel’ to the volume Esoteric 
Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons , edited by Acri (2016a). On the conceptualiza -
tion of ‘Maritime Asia’ as a geographical and historical 
theatre for the multi-centric spread of Esoteric Buddhism, 
see Acri 2016b, 2018, 2019; on the idea of ‘Maritime Silk 
Road’, see Kwa 2016. For an argument in favour of the 
‘Global Middle Ages’ (and the still underappreciated role 
that Asia played in them), see Holmes and Standen 2015 
and 2018; cf. Frankopan 2019.the genesis and development of cultural, religious, 
and artistic motifs across the mediaeval Indic world.
Current research increasingly shows that the 
Southeast Asian ‘peripheries’ were freer to innovate 
than the traditional ‘centres’, while the flourishing 
trade routes provided them with the necessary flow 
of human and material resources. As a result, the 
early kingdoms of Maritime Asia became well -
springs of cults, ritual technologies, sacred art/
architecture, and the new political models they 
underpinned. A transforming southern stream 
flowed from India and Sri Lanka, across the emerg -
ing island and littoral states, touching East Asia and 
eventually reaching Northeastern India, Nepal, and 
Tibet. For instance, images in the Chinese Mogao 
and Yulin caves, which have been hitherto ascribed 
to Tibetan influence, can now be seen to be influ-
enced by the art of the Pallava dynasty of Southern 
India and related to teachings introduced to China 
by Vajrabuddhi/Vajrabodhi and popularized by 
his pupil Amoghavajra (Khokhlov, this volume). 
The early propagation of the new maṇḍala- and 
mantra-based soteriological and ritual systems 
beyond the subcontinent begins to be recorded 
in the late 7th century in the journeys of learned 
and enterprising monks over the so-called (land) 
‘Silk Routes’. It expands in the 8th century over 
the maritime routes, from the monasteries and 
courts of South India and Sri Lanka to the Malay 
Peninsula, Java, and then China (with disciples 
following on to Korea and Japan). The presence of 
such important Mahāyāna and Mantranaya Bud-
dhist teachers as Prajña, Vajrabuddhi/Vajrabodhi, 
Amoghavajra, Śubhakarasiṃha, Suvarṇadvīpīya 
Dharmakīrti, and Atiśa in the polities arising along 
the ocean and shipping lanes turned them into 
vibrant centres of innovation rather than passive 
01_Intro CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan21.indd   1 25/1/22   1:02 PM

--- [Page 8] ---
Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock2
recipients of transmitted Indic ideas, as they have 
sometimes been considered. 
In spite of the scantiness of the textual record 
of the burgeoning southern trade and rice king -
doms, where manuscript textual sources surviving 
the warm and humid climate as well as onwards 
religious and cultural developments2 are less 
abundant and relatively younger than those that 
have come down to us from the Indian subcon -
tinent and Tibet, the scale and artistic originality 
manifested in the monumental ritual centres in 
Java, the Malay Peninsula, Campā, and the Khmer 
domains are striking evidence for the religious and 
political novelties devised and implemented in the 
South. The direct access Buddhist and Śaiva masters 
were afforded to the royal courts of the emerging 
Southern states—access which went beyond that 
achieved from the Buddhists’ monastic confines 
in the subcontinent—opened the way to the con-
struction of monuments at large ceremonial centres 
on an unprecedented scale. Along with the mon-
umental scale came conceptual leaps that turned 
temples into ‘meta-icons’, effectively merging 
the Indic disciplines of vastuśāstra (architecture) 
and śilpaśāstra (statuary). For example, early-9th 
century Borobudur in Central Java, the largest Bud -
dhist monument on earth, is now seen to embed 
the Yogatantra garbhadhātumaṇḍala of deities, as 
well as the apex of the vajradhātumaṇḍala, the two 
cosmograms that defined a Buddhist metaphysical 
hierarchy that would spread across Asia from the 
8th century (Kandahjaya, Volume Two). A few 
decades later at Prambanan in Java, some 50km 
to the southeast, a 47m-high temple to Śiva was 
erected with approximately 1,000 ribbed, bulbous 
finials which are regarded as liṅgas that carry the 
monsoon rain down through big makara-gargoyles 
to periodically flood the temple courtyard below 
with holy water (Sundberg, Volume Two). In the 
Khmer kingdom, on Mount Kulen near Angkor, 
a sahasraliṅga was carved into the riverbed of the 
Siem Reap river that flowed down to the capital; 
three centuries later, the Buddhist Bayon state 
2. For instance, the shift from a Hindu-Buddhist to an 
Isla
mic paradigm in Sumatra and Java, and from a Śaiva 
and Sanskritic Buddhist to a Pāli Buddhist paradigm in 
the Khmer domains in mainland Southeast Asia.temple, carved with multiple giant faces, was  
‘…no longer merely a devagṛha, the traditional 
Indian “house of God”, it 
became itself a God’ 
(Maxwell 2007: 86; cf. Sharrock, this volume). 
Southeast Asian kingdoms were not only 
early adopters of artistic, religious, and cultural 
elements that have been putatively ascribed to 
‘India’, but also innovators—or, indeed, creators. 
A specific form of Amoghapāśa, a manifestation 
of the compassionate Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, 
important across Asia as a saviour deity, whose 
cult now became linked to rituals for the dead, is 
now thought to have first appeared in the Malay 
Peninsula (Sinclair, this volume). A significant and 
puzzling fact is that the series of karaṇa dance-  
poses (as theorized in the Sanskrit Nāṭyaśāstra) 
depicted on the reliefs of Candi Śiva in Prambanan 
is not only one of the most complete, but also the 
earliest, being about 200 years older than the first 
known series in the Indian subcontinent, at the 
Coḻa Bṛhadīśvara temple in Tanjore (Iyer 1996: 
170–171); this opens up to the possibility that ‘the 
idea of representing karaṇa in a serial order in Cola 
times was recycled into India after Prambanan was 
carved’ (ibid.: 171). Such changes were to reverber-
ate across the Buddhist world for centuries and yet 
their origin in the southern seas has hitherto gone 
mostly undetected. 
While the Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra inspired murals in 
Central Asian Buddhist cave temples, sculptures 
and book illustrations in China, as well as scroll 
paintings in Japan, what Fontein (2021: 1) called its 
‘most monumental and by far the most elaborate 
set of illustrations’ was created by the sculptors of 
Borobudur, who were also pioneers in devising a 
large-scale monumental rendering that finds no 
counterparts in the coeval Buddhist world. And 
even if the depiction of the Hindu Epic Rāmāyaṇa  
at Lara Jonggrang in Prambanan might have been 
an early adoption from Gupta India, it remains 
unequalled even in the subcontinent for richness 
and completeness, suggesting that Southeast Asian 
masterminds inventively perfected and skilfully im -
plemented Indic ideas. This can also be witnessed 
from the fact that Southeast Asia documents the 
earliest and most abundant epigraphical evidence 
of the use of the material zeros in the Indic world 
(and the entire world indeed)—their rare Indian 
01_Intro CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan21.indd   2 25/1/22   1:02 PM

--- [Page 9] ---
Introduction: Volume 1: Intra-Asian Transfers and Mainland Southeast Asia3
attestations being at least a century later than their 
late-7th- and 8th-century precursors in Sumatra 
and Cambodia, and much less abundant than the 
9th-century specimens in Java (Diller 1995; Soutif 
2008). The problem of architectural prototypes was 
raised, somewhat preliminarily and provocatively, 
by Romain (2011) when discussing early temple 
architecture in Java and India, to ‘question the per -
petuated use of influence for understanding the 
process of diffusion of Indian art in Southeast Asia’, 
for ‘India related temples in Java appear almost 
simultaneously with the rise of free-standing stone 
architecture in South Asia itself’ (ibid.: 314).
The southern ‘periphery’ was evidently ener-
getic in sponsoring and devising royal applications 
of tantric cults of the Buddhist Mantranaya and 
Vajrayāna as well as of the Atimārga and Man -
tramārga divisions of Śaivism. Amoghavajra, 
among others, made contributions to vindicating 
fierce rituals to support the armies of Buddhist 
monarchs. The southern innovations followed  
Vajrabuddhi/Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra—who 
outsourced texts and doctrines from South India 
and Sri Lanka—to China in the 8th century, and 
Atiśa—who studied in the Malay Peninsula or 
Sumatra—to Tibet in the 11th century, suggesting 
that influence in a connected Buddhist world was 
bi-directional throughout. For a time in the early 
11th century, shortly before the Cōḻa invasions 
devastated several ports in the south and Islamic 
armies descended from Kabul to plunder Varana-
si, Śrīvijaya (with centres in Kedah in the Malay 
Peninsula and Palembang in Sumatra) emerged as 
a haven for Buddhist study, with Atiśa sitting for a 
decade at the feet of Buddhist guru Dharmakīrti of 
Suvarṇadvīpa.3 And in the ‘late phase’ of Buddhism 
in the Indian subcontinent, kingdoms in various 
regions of Southeast Asia (like Java, Sumatra, and 
the Khmer domains) attracted important religious 
personalities4 and granted support to artists and 
3. See Sinclair 2021, Schoterman 2016, and the chapter by 
Sharrock in this volume.
4. One such i
ntellectual was Śrī Gautamaśrī(bhadra), a 
paṇḍita (nat
ive of present-day Bengal) who, probably by 
the first half of the 13th century, engraved a short Sanskrit 
inscription on a cliff overlooking the sea at Pasir Panjang in 
Karimun Besar island (Riau archipelago); the same master 
was active in Northeastern India and Tibet, and taught artisans hailing from Bengal and the Himalayan 
region, thereby becoming the last bastions of San-
skritic Buddhism in Maritime Asia.
* * *
This two-volume anthology brings together strands 
of research by both senior and junior scholars into 
these southern innovations that are visible in icons 
and architecture, and that contribute to a new sense 
of the historical role of Maritime Asia. Most of 
the proposed chapters stem from papers presented 
in two summer programmes held in East Java in 
2016 (co-organized by the SOAS Southeast Asia Art 
Academic Programme [SAAAP] and the Nalan -
da-Sriwijaya Centre of ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Insti -
tute) and in Central Java in 2017 (co-organized by 
the SOAS SAAAP and Universitas Gadjah Mada).5 
These scholarly gatherings aimed at rediscovering 
the influence of the Buddhist and Hindu paradigms 
of mediaeval kingdoms adjoining the maritime 
trade route. With contributions from leading local 
and international scholars, the anthology expands 
on themes of innovation and transfer in the unique 
monuments, icons, and rituals developed in South 
India and Sri Lanka, Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, 
Java, and the Khmer and Cam domains that strong -
ly impacted Buddhist and Hindu art, architecture, 
and religious culture in India, Nepal, Tibet, and 
China, and incite to deeper explorations.
The present volume includes nine studies, sub-
divided into two parts, combining a mix of art his-
torical, archaeological, and textual data to advance 
innovative interpretations of monuments and icons 
across Maritime Asia from a perspective that takes 
into account circulatory dynamics and the creative 
role of South Indian and Southeast Asian locales in 
the development of iconographic and architectural 
motifs. Collectively, the nine studies presented in 
this volume explore intra- and inter-regional con-
nections across Maritime Asia and its ‘edges’ (for 
instance, Nepal and northern-central China) as well 
as regional foci, for instance Mainland Southeast 
disciples who became influential at the Sino-Mongolian 
Yuan court (see Sinclair 2018 and this volume). 
5. Both programmes were generously (co-)funded by the 
Alphawood Foundation in Chicago. 
01_Intro CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan21.indd   3 25/1/22   1:02 PM

--- [Page 10] ---
Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock4
Asia. They are complemented in Volume Two by 
nine more studies, two of which mainly dealing 
with Odisha,6 and the remainder focusing on Java 
and its translocal artistic and religious echoes.7
Part I, ‘Influences from the South’, presents 
three chapters highlighting the transfer of icons, 
artistic styles, and texts from Southern to Northern 
Asia, as well as their circulation across Maritime 
Asia. Chapter 2, ‘From Melayu to Thamel and 
Back: The Transmigration of the Eight-Armed 
Amoghapāśa’, by Iain Sinclair focuses on the en-
igmatic figure of Amoghapāśa with eight arms, 
which is prominent in the tantric Buddhist art of 
both the Malay-Indonesian Archipelago and Nepal. 
No scriptural source for it having been identified, 
previous scholars assumed that the figure was 
among those transmitted to the Archipelago as part 
of ‘Indo-Tibetan’ Buddhism. In the first compre-
hensive, cross-cultural iconographic study of this 
type, surveying all known examples and drawing 
on previously unstudied texts that are here edited 
and translated for the first time, Sinclair lays out a 
different scenario, namely that the earliest images 
originated within the former Melayu kingdom, 
soon diffusing to insular Southeast Asia, East Asia, 
and eventually Nepal, probably at the hands of 
Atiśa Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna, while the latest icons 
were reintroduced from the subcontinent to East 
Java in the 13th century, probably by the pa ṇḍita 
Gautamaśrībhadra. This appears to be a remarkable 
case of ‘periphery’ culture migrating over a long 
period and distance to the ‘centre’, as well as of the 
feedback loop popularly known as a ‘pizza effect’.8
A case of long-distance transfer of icono-
graphical themes from Southern Asia to Central 
and East Asia is documented in Chapter 3 by 
the late Yury Khokhlov, ‘In the Footsteps of 
Amoghavajra (705–774): Southern Indian Artis -
tic Mode in Tang China and its Transmission to  
Tibet’.9 Khokhlov’s research analyses the images 
6. By Sonali Dhingra and Umakant Mishra. 
7. By Hudaya Kandahjaya, Saran Suebsantiwongse, 
Michel Gauvain, the late Roy Jordaan, Mimi Savitri, Jeffrey 
Sundberg, and Hadi Sidomulyo.
8. A Neapo
litan dish that has flourished and evolved in 
the US and has been further exported at distance around 
the world and re-imported into Italy.
9. This essay was originally published as ‘Uncovering from Mogao and Yulin caves, which have been 
traditionally ascribed to Tibetan influence and 
believed to represent the early Tibetan style. 
Contrary to this common opinion, the author 
shows that these images are in fact influenced by 
Southern Indian art and in particular by the art of 
the Pallava kingdom in Tamil Nadu, and closely 
affiliated with teachings introduced to China by 
Vajrabuddhi/Vajrabodhi in the first half of the 
8th century and specifically propagated in Hexi by 
Amoghavajra in the mid-8th century. Furthermore, 
the chapter argues that the Tibetan conquest of the 
Hexi corridor enabled the still unacknowledged 
Tibetan appropriation of Chinese religious and 
artistic trends, which were popular in the region, and casts further light on the Tibetan adoption of 
Buddhism as a state religion following the model of 
the Chinese state-protective Buddhism established 
by Amoghavajra. 
Starting from the assumption that we are 
currently underestimating the influence from 
the Maritime Asian courts on wider Indic tantric 
paradigms, Chapter 4, ‘Heruka-Maṇḍalas across 
Maritime Asia’ by Peter Sharrock, discusses the 
royal abhiṣekas or initiations into the system of 
the fierce Esoteric Buddhist deity Heruka. Whereas 
the Heruka cults in Northern India and Tibet were 
confined to secret monastic settings, in the courts 
of the Southern Seas, political applications of the 
new ritual technology brought the icons and cere-
monies into more public and exoteric modes. The 
chapter documents the manifestations of this cult 
in the Khmer empire, Campā, East Java, Sumatra, 
and China under the Mongols.
Part II, ‘Transfers and Innovations in Mainland 
Southeast Asia’, contains six chapters dealing with 
aspects of Hindu and Buddhist art and architecture 
in the Khmer domains and Campā, and contex -
tualize them in the religious history of the wider 
Southern Asian region. Chapter 5, ‘Goddess Pra-
Amoghavajra’s Legacy in the Hexi Corridor and Tibet’ in 
the Journal of Tibetan Studies 21 (2019). On account of 
the importance and pertinence of its findings, a revised 
and updated, and additionally peer-reviewed, version is 
published in this anthology. Sadly, the author untimely 
passed away just a couple of months after submitting the 
final version of the article. We would like to thank Yannick 
Laurent for his assistance in editing Khokhlov’s manuscript.
01_Intro CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan21.indd   4 25/1/22   1:02 PM

--- [Page 11] ---
Introduction: Volume 1: Intra-Asian Transfers and Mainland Southeast Asia5
jñāpāramitā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarman 
VII’s Angkor’, by Jinah Kim explores the religious 
and political significance of Praj ñāpāramitā during  
Jayavarman VII’s reign (c. 1181–? 1218) from a 
trans-regional comparative perspective that locates 
Angkor in the trans-regional network of Esoteric 
Buddhism of the 12th–13th centuries. By contex -
tualizing the use of Prajñāpāramitā in Angkor and 
the larger historical context, the chapter argues 
that the analogy of Praj ñāpāramitā as the mother 
of all Buddhas was firmly materialized in Angkor 
more than anywhere else in the Buddhist world of 
the same period. By analysing epigraphic, textual, 
and art historical data not only from the Khmer 
context but also from India and Java, it demon-
strates how Jayavarman VII’s political adaptation 
of the Praj ñāpāramitā- mother analogy is reflected 
in the unique Khmer iconography of the Buddhist 
goddess Prajñāpāramitā. This further confirms that 
Khmer examples are not ‘outcastes’ in the icono-
graphic genealogy of the goddess Praj ñāpāramitā, 
but innovative yet politically sensitive creations 
that can help us understand the historical process 
behind the formation of a divine iconography in 
a doctrinally complex situation. 
Chapter 6, ‘Dancers, Musicians, Ascetics, and 
Priests: Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its 
Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor’ by 
Swati Chemburkar documents and re-examines 
the Śaiva ritual practices enjoining performance 
in the mediaeval Khmer domains. Combining data 
mined from the Śaiva textual archive in Sanskrit 
and vernacular languages with hitherto neglected 
art historical material from the Khmer domains, as 
well as insights from Campā, Java, and South India, 
the chapter first focuses on the Pāśupata evidence 
of performance-based worship in the pre-Angko-
rian period, then documents the survival of this 
sect as an elite of state-sponsored ritualists through 
the Angkorian period, and finally describes the 
development of performance in temples and fes-
tivals in both Śaiva and Buddhist milieus in the 
late Angkorian period. Rather like the Buddhist 
cult of Prajñāpāramitā, Pāśupata ascetics found 
fertile ground among the Khmers long after they 
declined in the subcontinent. 
Chapter 7, ‘Libraries or Fire Shrines? Rein-
terpreting the Function of “Annex Buildings” in 
Khmer Śaiva Temples from the Prism of Early Śaivism’, by Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chembur -
kar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin, deals with 
a unique and enigmatic feature of Khmer temple 
complexes dating from the early Angkorian to 
the late Angkorian periods, namely the small 
annex building with ventilation holes built in the 
southeastern quarter of the main temple, which 
scholars have tentatively called either a ‘library’ 
or a ‘fire-house’. The chapter suggests that these 
annex buildings, which appear to have no clearly 
identifiable counterparts in South Asian temples, 
may have been intended to function as both reposi -
tories for manuscripts and sacred spaces for specific 
Śaiva rituals, including ash-related observances 
of the Pāśupata sect, as well as initiation- and  
homa-rituals. 
Chapter 8, ‘ Śaiva Religious Iconography: 
Dancing Śiva in Multi-polity Medieval Campā’, 
by Mai Bùi Diệu Linh opens a series of three 
chapters focusing on Campā. It examines the 
identity and position of Śiva Naṭarāja, the ‘Lord 
of Dance’ manifestation, within the Cam mediae -
val religious landscape, particularly in Indrapura, 
Amaravati, and Vijaya. Having identified seven 
Cam sculptures of the dancing Śiva in museums 
and temples in Vietnam, it asks whether Naṭarā-
ja was ever worshiped in a Cam Śaiva temple as 
the main deity. Sculptures produced in different 
regions and in various time periods had their 
own unique styles and these differences suggest a 
dissemination process through multiple channels 
over a considerable period of time. The author’s 
analysis defines the independent political stance 
of each Cam polity as mirrored in its own icons 
and tackles the issue as to whether they evolved 
in a unified chronological sequence.
Chapter 9, ‘ The Colossal Trà Kiệu Rām āyaṇa 
Pedestal in Campā and its Relationship to Courtly 
Culture in Cambodia, East Java, and China’, by 
Mya Chau reviews the existing scholarship on the 
Trà Ki ệu pedestal from Campā within the context 
of the Rāmāyaṇa in Khmer and Javanese cultures
 
during the 7th–8th century. Using textual sources 
and secondary literature, iconographic evidence, 
and recent excavations, the author suggests that the 
Trà Ki ệu pedestal can be understood as a translocal 
depiction of the Rāmāyaṇa predominantly inspired 
by an oral narrative tradition aiming at heightening 
the real and imagined courtly culture for others 
01_Intro CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan21.indd   5 25/1/22   1:02 PM

--- [Page 12] ---
Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock6
beyond the king and his advisors. Visual evidence 
such as the Rāmāyaṇa reliefs from the Đà Nẵng 
Museum, bas-reliefs from the Chiên Đàn towers, 
Khương Mỹ temple reliefs, and portable bowls 
depict imagery related to the Trà Ki ệu pedestal 
that reinforces military and courtly culture, there- 
by promoting an imagined courtly culture of 
Campā displaying close relationships with Khmer 
and East Javanese iconography.
Chapter 10, ‘On the Chronological Interrelation -
ship between the Newly Found Inscriptions and the 
Temple Architecture of Campā: The Hòa Lai and Po 
Dam Sites’, by Trần Kỳ Ph ương analyses approach-
es to the Cam temple architectural history advanced 
in previous research. Through a comparative study 
of the newly found dated inscriptions at Hòa Lai 
and Po Dam temple sites, it analyses the process of 
structural techniques and the decorative patterns of 
these two temple complexes in order to propose a 
date for each monument. The site yields indicators 
of cultural transfers to the major early Khmer sites 
at Sambor Prei Kuk and Mount Kulen, as well as 
to Java and to the Malay Peninsula, reflecting a 
contemporaneous interaction in the region through 
trading connections by land, sea, and waterways.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016a. Esoteric Buddhism in Mediae-
val Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, 
Icons. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
. 2016b. ‘Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist 
Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes, 
7th–13th Centuries CE)’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 1–25.  
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
. 2018. ‘Maritime Buddhism’, Oxford  
Research Encyclopaedia of Religion (Online). 
Oxford University Press. [https://doi.org/ 
10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.013.638]
. 2019. ‘Imagining “Maritime Asia” ’, in 
Andrea Acri, Murari K. Jha, Sraman Mukherjee, 
and Kashshaf Ghani (eds.), Imagining Asia(s): 
Networks, Agents, Sites, pp. 36–59. Singapore: 
ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Diller, Anthony. 1995. ‘Śrīvijaya and the First Zeros’, 
Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society 68/1 (268): 53–66.Fontein, Jan. 2012. Entering the Dharmadhātu: A 
Study of the Gandavyūha Reliefs of Borobudur. 
Leiden: Brill.
Frankopan, Peter. 2019. ‘Why We Need to Think 
About the Global Middle Ages’, Journal of  
Medieval Worlds 1/1: 5–10.
Holmes, Catherine and Naomi Standen. 2015.  
‘Defining the Global Middle Ages (AHRC  
Research Network AH/K001914/1, 2013-15)’, 
Medieval Worlds 1: 106–117. 
. 2018. ‘Introduction: Towards a Global 
Middle Ages’, Past & Present 238, Issue supple-
ment 13: 1–44.
Iyer, Alessandra. 1996. ‘Prambanan Revisited: A 
Fresh Perspective on the Dance Sculptures  
of Candi Śiwa’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Éxtrême-Orient 83: 157–184.
Kwa, Chong Guan. 2016. ‘The Maritime Silk Road: 
History of an Idea’, Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre 
Working Paper no. 23. 
Maxwell, Thomas S. 2007. ‘Religion at the Time of 
Jayavarman VII’, in Joyce Clark (ed.), Bayon: 
New Perspectives, pp. 72–135. Bangkok: River 
Books.
Romain, Julia. 2011. ‘Indian Architecture in 
the “Sanskrit Cosmopolis”: The Temples of 
the Dieng Plateau’, in Pierre-Yves Manguin,  
A. Mani, and Geoff Wade (eds.), Early Interac-
tions between South and Southeast Asia: Reflec-
tions on Cross-cultural Exchange, pp. 299–316. 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Schoterman, Jan A. (Roy Jordaan and Mark E. Long, 
trans.). 2016. ‘Traces of Indonesian Influences  
in Tibet’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Bud -
dhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks 
of Masters, Texts, Icons , pp. 113–121. Singapore: 
ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Sinclair, Iain. 2018. ‘New Light on the Karimun 
Besar Inscription (Prasasti Pasir Panjang) and 
the Learned Man from Gaur’, NSC Highlights 11 
(December 2018–February 2019): 16–17.
. 2021. ‘Dharmakīrti of Kedah: His Life, 
Work and Troubled Times’, Temasek Working 
Paper no. 2. 
Soutif, Domnique. 2008. ‘Dénombrer les biens du 
dieu: Étude de la numération du vieux khmer 
(VIe–XIIe siècles śaka)’, Journal of Cambodia 
Research 10: 51–80. 
01_Intro CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan21.indd   6 25/1/22   1:02 PM

--- [Page 13] ---
1. This chapter was written during a Visiting Fellowship at 
the former Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre, ISEAS – Yusof Ishak 
Institute, Singapore. It expands on a subject first explored 
in my doctoral thesis (Sinclair 2016b: 146–153). Some of its 
findings were subsequently presented in an invited lecture 
at the Asian Civilisations Museum, Singapore (Sinclair 
2019c). I dedicate it to the memory of the late Buddharat -
na Vajrācārya, who introduced me to the praxis of the 
eight-armed Amoghapāśa at Lalitpur’s ancient Northern 
Stupa over two decades ago. I gladly thank Andrea Acri 
for constructive comments and encouragement to publish; 
E. Edwards McKinnon, Hueimin Chen, Julio Jeldres, Kwa 
Chong Guan, Peter Sharrock, David Templeman and the 
staff of ISEAS Library for locating useful material; the 
two anonymous reviewers for their learned comments; 
and Tai Yew Seng for advice on passages in Chinese. Any 
shortcomings are my responsibility alone.Chapter 2
From Melayu to Thamel and Back: The Transmigration  
of the Eight-Armed Amoghapāśa 
The form of Amoghapāśa that has one face 
and eight arms is generally regarded as part 
of the Indian pantheon, but the depictions 
from the subcontinent only began to appear after 
the downfall of Indian Buddhism in the early 13th 
century. A thorough survey of the artistic corpus 
and the salient textual material, which is undertaken 
here for the first time, shows that this form of the 
bodhisattva was already widespread throughout the 
Malayo-Javanese world half a millennium earlier. 
The eight-armed Amoghapāśa thereby appears to 
have originated in the Malay Archipelago, and to 
have spread from there to East Asia and the Khmer 
Empire. Its South Asian debut came much later, 
in the monasteries housing foreign monks in the 
Kathmandu Valley, especially the Vikramaśīla 
branch monastery in the district of Thamel. Then, 
in the late 13th century, the eight-armed form finally 
reappeared in Sumatra and Java, taking centre stage Iain Sinclair1
during the Javanese Siṅhasāri dynasty’s occupation 
of Melayu. The Siṅhasāri images of the bodhisattva 
show signs of direct input from the subcontinent, 
which can be linked circumstantially to exiles such 
as the paṇḍita Gautamaśrībhadra. By this time, the 
bodhisattva had undergone many transmigrations, 
from a seafaring deity who saves devotees from the 
eight great fears to a bodhisattva who stands at the 
gateway to advanced tantric practice.
the eight-armed avalokiteśvaras 
from śrīvijaya
The eight-armed, single-faced form of Avalokiteśvara, 
who is usually identified as Amoghapāśa, is well 
represented in the art of the Malay Archipelago. 
More than twenty sculptures of this form, dated 
to between the 7th and early 11th centuries on the 
basis of their style, have been discovered there. An 
inventory of early depictions originating from this 
region is provided in Appendix 2.1. Only the two- 
and four-armed forms of Avalokiteśvara are more 
frequently represented in the period corpus than 
the eight-armed form. What has been overlooked 
so far is the fact that no sculptures of the standing 
eight-armed form have been found in India; all 
such examples from the subcontinent are Nepa-
lese. Furthermore, the many written descriptions 
of this form produced on the subcontinent are also 
much later than the period of initial diffusion in 
the Archipelago, and also, it seems, the Nepalese 
depictions. As such, the iconography of the eight-
armed form is not only unusually prevalent in Mar -
itime Southeast Asia; it appears to have originated 
there, or at least, to have enjoyed its earliest, most 
definitive success in the region. The eight-armed 
Avalokiteśvara can then be appraised as an extraor-
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   9 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 14] ---
Iain Sinclair10
dinary development: an Austronesian innovation in 
an otherwise Sanskritic socioreligious environment. 
It represents a challenge to entrenched narratives 
of the region’s ‘Indianization’, which Andrea Acri 
(2017) and others have problematized. 
The fact that the early sculptures of the eight-
armed bodhisattva are peculiar to the Archipelago 
has been noticed before. Nandana Chutiwongs ob -
served: ‘Such manifestations of Avalokiteśvara, cu -
riously enough, have never been found in Indian art’ 
(1984: 344). However, this observation has not led to 
the proposition that the eight-armed form could be 
native to the region. Instead, the prevalence of the 
form in Nepal, remarked on by Chutiwongs (ibid.: 
n. 398, 442) and others, has supported a tacit as -
sumption that eight-armed Avalokiteśvaras existed 
all over the subcontinent. But all depictions of the 
eight-armed form found on the subcontinent are 
Nepalese, not Indian.2 They are also much later than 
the Malayo-Javanese ones. The Nepalese images are 
so late that they bypass ‘Indian Buddhism’ entirely, 
insofar as Buddhism in India is conceived as a pre-
13th century phenomenon.3 This is a remarkable 
situation in itself. There are two regional corpuses 
of depictions, separated from each other by a large 
geographical distance as well as a long interval, and 
so far, no direct connection between them has been 
found.
The earliest of the Southeast Asian depictions 
is the bronze from Bantaeng in South Sulawesi (11; 
numbers in bold refer to entries in Appendix 2.1). 
It is dated to between the 7th and 8th centuries 
by Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer and Marijke J. 
Klokke (1988: 111). Another seven sculptures can 
be assigned to about the 8th century (3, 6, 7, 10, 
13, 17, 18). The remainder of the corpus appears 
to have been produced between the 9th and 10th 
centuries. The sculptures produced in the Javanese 
Siṅhasāri dynasty (1222–1292) are outliers and rep-
resent a revival movement, as I will argue later in the 
2. For instance, Donaldson 2001: 201–202, in an otherwise 
exemplary survey of Buddhist sculpture of Odisha, states 
that eight-armed Avalokiteśvaras are ‘most popular’, but 
all examples or sources referred to by Donaldson originate 
in Nepal. 
3. Buddhists persisted on the Indian subcontinent beyond 
the 13th century (Sinclair 2019b: 295–299), but were con -
fined in enclaves that had little contact with each other.chapter. While the style-based dating of the corpus 
is imprecise, the approximate range of dates is not 
currently in doubt. 
The findspots of the early eight-armed Ava-  
lokiteśvaras are concentrated in Malay-speaking 
areas of Southeast Asia. Four bronzes are from 
Palembang and the Sumatran highlands (1, 3, 13, 
16), and another six are from the northern fringe of 
the Malay Peninsula, including parts of present-day 
Thailand (8, 9, 14, 15, 17, 18). Two bronzes were 
found at farther reaches of the Malay world: the 
above-mentioned Bantaeng bronze, and a figure 
from Phan Rang in former Cam country (19). Both 
of these are considered to be ‘imports’,4 the latter 
coming from Śrīvijaya. Central Java is identified 
as the source of just two bronzes (4, 12), and the 
probable but unverified source of six others (5 , 6, 7, 
8, 10, 21)—the smaller proportion of the corpus. A 
further two bronzes ( 2, 20) have unspecified places 
of origin but are generally understood to have come 
from the Malay Archipelago, as they belong to col-
lections of other objects found in the region. On 
the whole, the distribution of these images clusters 
around the Malay parts of Maritime Southeast Asia, 
and in the middle of the 7th–10th century interval. 
There are minor differences in their ornamentation, 
hairstyles, and modes of dress, some of which will 
be examined further below. Sumatran, Peninsular 
and Javanese bronzes of the eight-armed figure are 
not stylistically differentiable at this stage of analysis. 
The corpus is homogenous enough to constitute 
a common ‘Śrīvijayan type’. The term ‘Śrīvijayan 
type’ will then be used, albeit with the caveat that 
not all specimens can be definitely associated with 
a Śrīvijayan polity. Śrīvijaya, however its territory 
may be demarcated, is generally understood to have 
centred on the city of Palembang and the river for-
merly called Melayu.5 
While the art-historical record reveals that 
standing Avalokiteśvaras with eight arms first ap-
peared in the Malayo-Javanese world, their models 
or typological precursors are to be sought on the 
4. Chutiwongs 1984: 442.
5. Palembang once understood itself to have been the 
central polity of Śrīvijaya, in relation to a more fluid pe -
riphery (Manguin 2017: 99). On the location of Palembang’s 
Tatang River and its ancient name Melayu, see Manguin 
ibid.: 102 and Kitchener and Kustiarsih 2019: 7. 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   10 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 15] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back11
Indian subcontinent. Śrīvijayan Avalokiteśvara 
statues were first associated with South Indian 
style by Marie Thérèse de Mallmann (1951: 573–574). 
Certain features of the earliest Śrīvijayan example, 
the Bantaeng bronze, have been likened to those of 
Pallava art of the 7th to 8th centuries. The bronze 
is believed to have been an import—that is, ‘not 
made on the island on which it was found’, because 
‘no other bronze figurine from the area is known, 
resembling this one’ (Lunsingh Scheurleer and 
Klokke 1988: 111). However, it can be added here that 
the Bantaeng bronze is not a stylistic isolate in the 
region. It looks to have come from the same work-
shop as another Avalokiteśvara statuette ‘reportedly 
from Sumatra’, which displays common features 
including a ‘bejewelled waistband … a recurrent 
feature of bronzes of south India’ (Guy 1995: 79). 
Other features reminiscent of South Indian period 
sculptures, such as long matted hair ends, are dis-
played by some bronzes (1, 2).6 Contacts between 
the Archipelago and the South of the subcontinent 
6. See e.g. Eilenberg 1997: 170, fig. 8.
Fig. 2.1a: Eight-armed Avalokiteśvara (11). Bronze, c. 
7th century. Bantaeng, Sulawesi. On loan from the 
Asian Art Society, The Netherlands. (Public Domain)Fig 2.1b: Avalokiteśvara. Bronze, date unknown, 
‘reportedly from Sumatra’ . Hand drawing by author 
based on Guy 1995, fig. 14.
are, in general, well known from written sources 
such as Tang-era travelogues.7 Although there are 
few if any surviving Pallava bronzes that could be 
nominated as models for the Śrīvijayan type, it is 
known that bronze statues of Avalokiteśvara were 
being cast in South India from the 7th century 
onwards, if not earlier.8 
A faint indication of a cult of the bodhisattva 
in South India comes from a story in a Chinese 
anthology dating to the 11th century or therea -
bouts, the Sanbao ganying yaolüe lu 三宝感应要
略录 . One story in this anthology tells of an image 
of Avalokiteśvara set up on the advice of a monk 
from the north. It concerns the noose-wielding 
7. Maritime trade between Southeast Asia and the sub -
continent in this period was concentrated in the ‘southern 
rim’, as Acri 2018: 140–141 argues.
8. Srinivasan 2013: 172, fig. 13.2 states that a bronze in 
the Victoria and Albert Museum, IM.300-1914, identified 
as Avalokiteśvara (it lacks the characteristic Amitābha in 
the crown), has been ‘technically finger-printed to the early 
Andhra Pallava period’. On this bronze see also Guy 2014: 
7, vol. I, cat. 7.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   11 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 16] ---
Iain Sinclair12
form of Avalokiteśvara known as Amoghapāśa—
the name by which the eight-armed form is being 
called at this time. The story is titled ‘A South Indian 
Country Makes an Amoghapāśa Icon [which] Re-
sponds [to Prayers]’ 南印度國造不空羂索像感應 :
A country in South India was desolate, the ruler 
and ministers losing health, the people already 
dying. The king sent an envoy to ask the Cen-
tral Indian [monk] Śrīmitra to save the country 
from disaster. Mitra came to this country, tell-
ing the king: ‘There is a great saint, the Infallible 
Noose [Amoghapāśa] Avalokiteśvara, O great 
king. Just make [his] image, install [it in] the 
city’s southwestern tower.’ The king accepted 
the teaching, made the image right away and 
installed [it] in the west of the city, a pavilion in the south. Radiance from the image shone 
for one yojana. The king and minister kept 
their health. The five grain [crops] were abun-
dant, the people had a surplus. The country was 
touched by that image. There was an old mon-
astery in the south of the city; the pavilion was 
moved to the monastery.
9
Whatever the historicity, if any, of this tale, it may 
well ‘originate in a Western Regions chronicle’ 
(chu Xiyu ji 出西域記 ), as is claimed.10 It is also 
interesting that the anthology elsewhere refers to 
*Suvarṇabhūmi (Jindiguo 金地國 )—the very area 
of interest—even if only in the sense of a ‘place of 
legend’.11 In any case, there is no indication as to 
which of the many forms of Amoghapāśa is being 
discussed.
9. 南印度國荒廢。君臣不保壽。 人民已喪。王遣使。請中天
竺尸利蜜多。欲救國災。 密多來至此國。 白王言： 有大聖不空
羂索觀自在[。 ]大王。 方造像安置城西南閣。 王受教已。 即造
形像。 安置城西南閣。 像放光明。照一由旬。王臣保壽。 五穀
豐饒。 人民從餘[。 ]國愍感其像。 有城南故寺。 即移閣爲寺矣  
(T 2084 853b 1–7, with modified punctuation).
10. T 2084 853a 29. An Indic name such as Śrīmitra, and for 
that matter any detailed account of affairs in South India, 
is unlikely to have been invented by the Chinese compiler 
of this anthology. 
11. Matsu
mura 2011: 263. The short story in question is 
said to be taken from an (otherwise unidentified) ‘Parable 
Scripture’ ( Piyu jing 譬喩經 ); see T 2084 836a 6–10. This rel -
atively early reference is omitted from the discussion of 
Suvarṇabhūmi’s toponomy in Skilling 2019.the scriptural undergirding of the 
eight-armed amoghapāśa
A canonical, Buddha-spoken description of a form of 
Avalokiteśvara or Amoghapāśa with eight arms has 
not yet been identified. Protocols for worshipping 
images of Amoghapāśa are, in general, documented 
in texts that were in circulation by the 7th century. 
The two principal works are the Amoghapāśahṛdaya 
(hereafter Hṛdaya), the earliest Buddha-spoken text 
on the bodhisattva, and its major expansion, the 
Amoghapāśakalparāja (hereafter Kalparāja). The 
Hṛdaya was widely disseminated throughout Asia. 
The less common Kalparāja has been transmitted in 
a single Sanskrit manuscript (hereafter ‘MS’12), in a 
Tibetan translation and a Chinese translation. The 
MS and the translations convey different recensions 
of the text.13 The Kalparāja builds a ritual edifice 
around the Hṛdaya, emphasizing image magic.14 
Many of the manifestations of Avalokiteśvara 
described in the Kalparāja are informed by the 
appropriations of theist imagery revealed in the 
Kāra ṇḍavyūha, a narration of Avalokiteśvara’s 
deeds that began circulating at around the same 
time.15 A common thread throughout this literature 
is that the bodhisattva partakes of and supersedes 
the powers of various Hindu gods, whom he is said 
to incorporate.16 
12. The text of the East Indian manuscript of the 
Amoghapāśakalparāja  kept in Tibet is being published in 
irregular instalments at Taisho University. The published 
facsimile of the MS (Mikkyō Seiten Kenkyūkai 1996) has 
not been used in the present study.
13. Accor
ding to Tanaka 2019: 44, there are two primary 
recensions: one corresponding to the Sanskrit MS and the 
Tibetan translation, and another corresponding to the 
Chinese. 
14. Shino
hara 2014: 86 regards this ‘image worship’ as a 
fundamentally new development.
15. On this c
entral theme of the Kāra ṇḍavyūha ,
 see Sin -
clair 2015: 435ff.
16. An important example of imagery shared with the 
Kāra ṇḍavyūha is the e leven-faced Avalokiteśvara whose 
body creates and extrudes the heads of eleven Hindu gods 
(cf. Sinclair 2015: 436), translated from Kalparāja MS f. 69b 2–4 
in Sinclair 2016b: 154–155.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   12 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 17] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back13
While manifestations of Avalokiteśvara with 
four, six, ten, sixteen and thirty-two arms are 
described in the Kalparāja, an eight-armed, sin -
gle-faced form is not. There is only a brief descrip-
tion of a form with three faces and a partly dissimilar 
array of eight hands (noose, lotus, trident, wishing 
gem, club, reassurance pose, rosary, flower bunch).17 
A description corresponding to the Śrīvijayan type 
is yet to be found in any canonical source—in the 
Chinese canon (Wong 2015: 48–52), in the Tibetan 
bKa’ ’gyur or in large extracanonical corpora such 
as the Dunhuang manuscripts (van Schaik 2006). 
Nor has it been noticed in previous longue durée 
studies of Amoghapāśa (e.g. Tuladhar-Douglas 
2006) that the extant descriptions of the type in 
Sanskrit only started circulating several centuries 
after the advent of the first images. A conceptual 
basis for the eight-armed iconography must then 
be sought in the entire religious milieu surrounding 
Avalokiteśvara up to the 7th century.
Many aspects of the bodhisattva’s appearance 
are consistent with the iconographic programme 
of the Kalparāja. The Śrīvijayan eight-armed form 
looks like a canonical four-armed form18 with two 
pairs of hands added, or a six-armed form with 
one pair of hands added, or a ten-armed form with 
one less pair of hands. There is an especially close 
resemblance to the standing six-armed form, the 
so-called Pretasaṃtarpita form,19 which was widely 
17. don yod pa’i rgyal po ni [...] phyag brgyad pa/ dbu gsum 
pa/ de bzhin du spyan gsum pa/ zhi ba’i zhal du bri bar bya 
ste de bzhin du zhags pa ’dzin pa dang padma ’dzin pa dang 
mdung rtse gsum pa dang/ ril ba spyi blugs ’dzin pa dang/ 
yid bzhin gyi nor bu dang/ be con dang dbugs ’byin pa dang/ 
bgrang phreng dang/ me tog thum po ’dzin par bya’o (D 686 
256b 3–5).
18. The first description of a four-armed Amoghapāśa 
in the Kalparāja is given with instructions for making 
a sandalwood-paste effigy: amoghapāśaṃ kartavyaṃ 
sarvālaṃkāravibhūṣitaṃ jaṭāmakuṭama ṇḍitam e ṇeyacar-
mapaśupativeśadharaṃ caturbhujam eka[ ṃ] padmadharaṃ 
dvitīya[ṃ] pāśadharaṃ tṛtīyaṃ śūladharaṃ caturtham 
āśvāsanaṃ padmāsanaṃ vyāmaprabhasamalaṃkṛtam  (MS, 
f. 42a 7–b 1, via Suzuki, Ōtsuka and Kimura 2000: 52–53). Note 
that citations from the Kalparāja are given here with regu-
larized orthography. Other four-armed forms are described 
in the early literature (see e.g. Reis-Habito 1999: 59, 63–64).
19. Leoshko 1985 and Bhattacharya 2001: 34–36 have 
studi
ed East Indian examples of standing six-armed depicted across East India and to a lesser extent in 
Nusantara. The eight-armed form, seen alongside 
these canonically codified forms of Amoghapāśa, 
appears to be an improvised filling of a gap in the 
pantheon. From the start, the eight-armed form 
shows signs of being transmitted mainly as an 
image cult, and this mode of transmission may 
reveal something about its environment of origin.
A distinctive feature of many early depictions 
of the bodhisattva, which has a literate basis, is 
the tiger pelt wrapped on top of a lower garment 
or dhoti (2, 3, 6, 8, 11, 13, 14, 18, 20). The require-
ment for a pelt goes back to the Hṛdaya,20 and is 
repeated in the Kalparāja: Amoghapāśa wears the 
garment of Paśupati (paśupativeśadhara), that is, 
a tiger pelt. The most straightforward interpreta-
tion, in the context of the Hindu Paśupati/Rudra 
mythos, is that a tiger pelt is worn on its own, as 
a ‘single garment’,21 like a kilt, as befits a ‘Lord of 
Sacrificial Beasts’. To interpret the paśupativeśa 
as an additional lower garment might be regarded 
as an indication of remoteness from the classical 
cultural context. There are also examples of this 
interpretation in the non-Buddhist art of the Ar -
chipelago—at Prambanan, for instance.22 The use of 
pelt-over-dhoti style is another indication that the 
Śrīvijayan Amoghapāśas are not modelled wholly 
on Indian images. They share in a visual idiom that 
was common in Maritime Asia at the time.23 
Certain elements of the iconography of the 
eight-armed form are consistent across the Śrīvi -
jayan corpus, but there is also variation in the 
corpus that is largely missing in later representa -
tions and has not been explained. In most depic-
tions, a book, a lotus, and a waterpot are held in the 
Avalokiteśvaras. Bhattacharya identifies them as the 
Pretasaṃtarpitalokeśvara specified in Sādhanamālā 43 
(ed. Bhattacharyya 1925: 89; Sakuma 2002, No. 16), but it 
is doubtful that this text is the direct source of the earliest 
depictions (cf. Woodward 2007: n. 24).
20. See ed. M
eisezahl 1962: 322 9, 327 5.
21. On the directive that Pāśupata ascetics should be 
ekavāsāḥ  (this single garment can be an animal pelt), see 
Chakraborti 1970: 77.
22. Nik Has
san Shuhaimi 1977: 26–27.
23. Bopea
rachchi 2017: 49, 61 has identified a couple of 
Sri Lankan pelt-over-dhoti Avalokiteśvara images, which 
are presumably recipients of Archipelago style. 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   13 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 18] ---
Iain Sinclair14
left hands, and the right hands display a rosary, a 
gesture of giving and a gesture of fearlessness. The 
objects held in the fourth pair of hands vary. In 
later, standardized depictions of the form, the right 
hand holds a noose and the opposing hand holds 
an ascetic’s three-branched staff (trida ṇḍa), but in 
the Śrīvijayan bronzes a noose or visually similar 
object is generally held in a right hand. These early 
sculptures display items that resemble a three-
branched staff—a noose (5, 18), hook (14), conch 
(12), or trident (2). Some forms of Amoghapāśa 
are required by the Kalparāja to carry a trident 
(triśūla).24 The trident and conch would probably 
be seen as objects more representative of Śaivism 
or Vaiṣṇavism, respectively, than of Buddhism. The 
god Harihara, for instance, holds both a conch and 
a trident.25 Eight-armed forms of Nārāyaṇa and Ma -
heśvara were certainly known to literate Buddhists,26 
and the eight-armed Durgā is an early, persistent 
figure in the visual culture of Java. 
It is hard to avoid the impression that the eight-
armed Amoghapāśa aims to capture some of the 
otherworldly grandeur of Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva religi -
osity, as other Avalokiteśvara forms clearly attempt -
ed to do.27 The fact that all the Amoghapāśas from 
the Archipelago have their crowns marked with the 
Buddha Amitābha—a rare element of consistency—
at the same time shows a certain keenness to avoid 
confusion with Hindu cult objects. There are, fur-
thermore, concrete indications that the eight-armed 
form invokes the age-old notion of Avalokiteśvara 
as the pacifier of the Eight Great Fears.
24. For one prescription of a form with a trident see e.g. 
note 1
8 above; see also Kalparāja MS f. 53b 3. For magical 
uses of the ( tri-)śūla, see MS ff. 30a 2–3, 38a 2. Wong 2015 lists 
references to tridents in the Chinese translation T 1092,  
ff. 265, 266, 281, 304–305, 327, 346, etc.
25. Adicea
m 1966.
26. See e.g. Ru lengjia jing 入楞伽經  (Laṅkāvatāra ) 10.797a, 
viṣṇur maheśvaraś cāpi (ed. Vaidya 1963: 159 24), translat -
ed as 八臂那羅延及摩醯首羅  (T 671 584b 7), ‘Nārāyaṇa the 
Eight-armed and Maheśvara’, by Bodhiruci 菩提流支 . 
Many more references could be given to eight-armed ( ba 
bi 八臂 ) Nārāyaṇa (e.g. Tuoluoni ji jing , discussed below,  
T 1336, f. 591a) and other Hindu deities ( tian 天) in Chinese 
Buddhist texts; see e.g. Reis-Habito 1999: 53.
27. Sincl
air 2015: 453, 2016b: 153.two indian eight-armed 
avalokiteśvaras and the eight fears
Two atypical sculptures of an Avalokiteśvara with 
one face and eight arms were produced on the 
subcontinent in the first millennium. They are 
seated figures, unlike the Śrīvijayan icons, but they 
provide the closest points of comparison from 
outside Maritime Southeast Asia. The earlier of 
the two sculptures, first described by Akira Miyaji 
(2000), is said to have come from Swāt in pres -
ent-day Pakistan. The later sculpture, as noticed by 
Bautze-Picron (2004: 288, fig. 40), is from Nālandā. 
The crosslegged pose of both sculptures is icono -
graphically distinct from the standing pose of 
nearly all Malayo-Javanese images.28 One figure 
in Ronggowarsito Museum ( 21), depicted in a 
seated pose, is the lone exception that proves the 
rule. It has one leg dangling, which is again unlike 
the two sculptures from the subcontinent. The 
Nālandā sculpture, furthermore, holds a pair of 
hands at its heart in a pose that is not seen in the 
Śrīvijayan corpus and which marks it as another 
distinct type, a separate ontogeny, which did not 
extend into the Archipelago. There are, in addition, 
eight-armed forms of the dancing Avalokiteśvara, 
Padmanarteśvara, which represent an independent 
and unrelated iconography; the few extant South 
Asian depictions need not be discussed here.29
28. One specification allows Amoghapāśa to be depict -
ed either sitting or standing: […] āryāvalokiteśvaram 
amoghapāśaṃ citrayitavyam | utthitaṃ vā niṣa ṇṇaṃ vā 
parya ṇkaniṣa ṇṇaṃ vā lik hya ( Kalparāja MS f. 45a 2, via 
Suzuki, Ōtsuka and Kimura 2000: 60).
29. A sculpted stone tora ṇa from Bih ar featuring ‘the 
eight-armed Avalokiteśvara’, as described by Claudine 
Bautze-Picron (2019: 31), plainly represents Padmanarteś -
vara, albeit with a non-standard iconography that has little 
relation to the eight-armed form described in Sādhana -
mālā 31 (ed. Bhattacharyya 1925: 76). In this tora ṇa the 
entire ensemble is, unusually, dancing: Avalokiteśvara 
holds clappers (in the view of Bautze-Picron) and his four 
followers play musical instruments. Since another tora ṇa 
at the s
ame site depicts a dancing Mañjuvajra, its icono -
graphic programme could be investigated in connection 
with Vṛttamālāstuti 119, a metrical work by Jnānaśrīmitra 
that is nominally dedicated to Mañjuvajra. Śākyarakṣita’s 
commentary on this verse (ed. Hahn 2014: 14) characterizes 
Padmanarteśvara as mañjuvajrasyāmnāyaviśeṣaḥ .
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   14 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 19] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back15
The eight-armed Avalokiteśvara sculpture 
from Swāt is novel in that it arranges portrayals 
of the classical Great Fears (mahābhaya) around 
the main figure. The Saddharmapu ṇḍarīka, which 
contains early and well-known preaching on Ava-
lokiteśvara’s salvific power, is identified by Miyaji 
as the primary source for the Fears depicted in 
this sculpture. It should, however, be pointed out 
that the relevant passage, Saddharmapu ṇḍarīka  
24.5–16, can be read as specifying up to twelve 
Fears.30 Sets of Eight Great Fears (aṣṭamahābhaya) 
are set out in other scriptural traditions, which 
Motohiro Yoritomi (1990: 643ff.) has identified. 
The Swāt sculpture shows, in spite of its poor con -
dition, the bodhisattva reaching into a number 
of frightful scenes: He saves devotees from the 
Execution, Rapacious Beast, and Firepit Fears with 
his left hands, and from the Rocks and Bondage 
Fears with his right hands. The whole tableau 
of the Swāt sculpture is in a category of its own. 
Likewise, the bodhisattva’s visual style—his hair 
bouffant,31 adornment and so on—are different 
from the Śrīvijayan sculptures. The hands and the 
Fears form an integral composition in the Swāt 
sculpture, such that the central figure could not be 
decoupled from the surrounding vignettes without 
disrupting coherence and meaning. Nonetheless, 
this may be exactly what has happened at some 
stage in the transmission of the eight-armed form. 
30. Miyaji (2000: 1258) gives the impression that the 
Saddharmapu ṇḍarīka i s the locus classicus for the aṣṭa- 
mahābhaya proper  and therefore the direct inspiration 
for the eight-armed iconography of the Swāt sculpture, 
but does not clarify how the twelve verses of Saddhar -
mapu ṇḍarīka 24.5– 16 reduce to eight fears. Saddharma -
puṇḍarīka 24 teaches that Avalokiteśvara saves from Fire -
pits or Fire ( agnikhada , 24.5); Water ( jala, 24.6); Falling off 
a High Plateau ( merutala , 24.7); Hurled Boulders (24.8); 
Armed Men ( śatruga ṇair…śas trahastair, 24.9); Execution 
(vadhya , 24.10); Bondage ( bandhana , 24.11); Spells and 
Spirits ( mantra …bhūta , 24.12); Snakes etc. ( nāga… , 24.13); 
Rapacious (‘sharp-toothed-nailed’, tīkṣ ṇadaṃṣṭ ranakha , 
24.14) Beasts; and Lightning Strikes ( jvalanārcis , 24.15–16). 
See ed. Dutt 1953: 294–295. Yoritomi 1990: 643 identifies 
seven Fears in this chapter.
31. The Swāt sculpture is depicted with ‘hair bunched like 
a vase’ kind, which, incidentally, the Kalparāja says practi -
tioners can acquire ( ākuñcitaku ṇḍalake śaś ca bhaviṣyanti ; 
e.g. MS f. 32b 27, via Suzuki, Ōtsuka and Kimura 2000: 22). There are remarkable visual similarities between 
the Swāt Avalokiteśvara and the Śrīvijayan type, 
similar enough to foster suspicion that miscopying 
might be involved. Firstly, one right hand of the 
Swāt Avalokiteśvara grips what appears to be a rope 
or line extending outwards. The line runs between 
two adjacent vignettes, those of the Swordsman and 
the Rapacious Beast.32 These two Fears are being 
appeased by separate hands: Avalokiteśvara stays 
the Sword and lifts the paws of the Beast. The line 
then may have been connected to a drowning man, 
as there is no depiction of the Fear of Water, which 
is included in most sets of the Fears. This line-hold -
ing hand is posed in the position corresponding to 
the rosary-holding fist of the Śrīvijayan type, not 
the noose-holding hand. Secondly, the lower left  
hand of the Swāt Avalokiteśvara lifts the door of a 
prison coop to release a devotee from the Fear of 
Bondage.33 The lifted door of the coop has a shape 
similar to the body of the waterpot or kendi held 
32. Namely, the fear of a tīkṣṇa[-]daṃṣṭr anakha  beast 
(Saddharmapu ṇḍarīka 2 4.14ab, ed. Dutt 1953: 2955), fol -
lowing Miyaji 2000: 1258. 
33. Namely, the fear of ha ḍiniga ḍa (Saddh armapu ṇḍarīka 
24.11ab, ed. Dutt 1953: 264 19), following Miyaji ibid .
Fig. 2.2 : Eight-armed Avalokiteśvara pacifying the 
Great Fears (top left: Execution, Rapacious Beast, 
Firepit; top right: Rocks, Fetters). Stone, c. 7th century. 
Said to be from Swāt, Pakistan. Hand drawing by 
author based on Miyaji 2000: 1262, 1264.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   15 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 20] ---
Iain Sinclair16
in the corresponding hand of the Śrīvijayan icons. 
Both of these elements of the Swāt sculpture have 
visually similar but functionally different parallels in 
later depictions of Avalokiteśvaras with eight arms. 
A form of Avalokiteśvara who placates the 
Eight Fears is mentioned in the early literature 
on Amoghapāśa. This form is one of four to be 
engraved around the body of an enchanted vase, 
as described in the Kalparāja. The relevant passage 
gives just a minimum of detail:
Amoghapāśa, the Noble Avalokiteśvara, is to be 
drawn facing east; southwards, the Eight Fears 
[form]; north, the Pensive; west, the All-As-
suring [Ekādaśamukha]. All are adorned with 
all ornaments, are seated cross legged on lily 
pads.34
The terse directions of the Sanskrit text have been 
unpacked here by following the more verbose 
Chinese translation.35 The Tibetan translation 
conveys the quite different understanding that the 
sides of the vase are engraved with (the bodhisat-
tvas’) hand gestures.36 The forms of these four Ava- 
lokiteśvaras are not described in other chapters; 
their iconography may have been assumed knowl-
edge. ‘Pensive’ Avalokiteśvaras, for instance, were 
produced in significant numbers, both on the 
subcontinent37 and in Maritime Southeast Asia.38 
However, the form of Avalokiteśvara most com-
34. amoghapāśāryāvalokiteśvaraṃ citrayitavyaṃ pūr-
vāmukhaṃ (ed. pūrvvā mukhaṃ ) dakṣi ṇato aṣṭ abhayam  
uttaraṃ cintāmayaṃ paścimaṃ samāśvāsakaraṃ sarve 
sarvālaṅkāravibhūṣitaṃ paryaṅke niṣa ṇṇaṃ padm apatraiḥ  
(MS, f. 64a 1–2, ed. Mikkyō Seiten Kenkyūkai 2001: 70). 
35. 東面葉上。不空羂索觀世音菩薩[…]南面葉上[。 ]除
觀世音菩薩[…]西面葉上。 十一面觀世音菩薩[…]北面
葉 上 。如 意 輪 觀 世 音 菩 薩  (T 1092 288a 27–b5). Ellipses mark 
passages elided here in order to facilitate comparison with 
the Sanskrit text cited in the previous note. 
36. ’phag
s pa spyan ras gzigs dbang phyug bri bar bya ste/ 
shar phyogs su zhal bri/ lho ru mi ’jigs pa sbyin pa’i  phyag/ 
nub tu dbyig ’byin gyi phyag/ byang du yid bzhin nor bu 
rgyan thams cad kyis brgyan pa skyil mo krung du bzhugs 
par bya’o  (D 686 f. 119 1–2). This passage corresponds to a 
part of the MS that is currently unedited.
37. Bautze-Picron 2004: 252–254, 284–285, figs. 25–28. 
For another instance of the Pensive form appearing in the 
retinue of Avalokiteśvara, see ibid .: 286, fig. 33.
38. Chutiw
ongs 1994; Park 2019.monly associated with the Eight Fears on the 
subcontinent has two arms, not eight. Sculptures 
of such two-armed Avalokiteśvaras abound in 
the rock-cut architecture of Maharashtra; they 
often incorporated portrayals of the Eight Fears. 
The prevalence and significance of these Ava-
lokiteśvaras have been discussed by Osmund Bo-
pearachchi (2014 ). The only known South Asian 
depiction of the Eight Fears that centres on an 
eight-armed figure is the Swāt Avalokiteśvara. 
Giving due consideration to the artistic corpus, 
it is doubtful that the Eight Fears Avalokiteśvara 
mentioned in the Kalparāja was envisaged as hav-
ing eight arms. 
Fig. 2.3: Two-armed Avalokiteśvara displaying the 
gesture of unfear and holding a lotus, surrounded 
by vignettes of rescue from the Eight Great Fears. 
Left, top to bottom: Firepit, Execution, Rocks, Water 
(truncated). Right: Rapacious Beast, Snake, Elephant, 
Bondage. Stone relief, Aurangabad, Maharashtra. 
Photograph (‘016 Door from Side’ , https://www.flickr.
com/  photos/an
andajoti/34044313916/) by Anandajoti 
Bhikkhu, 2017, CC BY 2.0.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   16 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 21] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back17
In a further development of saviour-bodhisat- 
tva iconography, which can be raised only in 
passing here, the tableau of a two-armed figure 
flanked by scenes of the Fears began to feature Tārā 
rather than Avalokiteśvara as the central figure.39 
Many depictions of Aṣṭamahābhaya-Tārā appeared 
on the East of the subcontinent instead of the West; 
they were first sighted around Magadha in the mid–
late 7 th century by Xuanzang 玄奘  and Yijing 義
淨. The worship of Tārā soon spread to Java, while 
gaining little traction in Śrīvijaya. Aṣṭamahāb -
haya-Tārā emerges as a saviour figure at about the 
same time as the eight-armed Amoghapāśa—but 
with a distinctly different geographic footprint, 
which has hardly been noticed as such before. 40 A 
degree of regionality can then be associated with 
maritime saviour figures, and this supports the 
proposition that the eight-armed Amoghapāśa 
emerged as a kind of local genius before spreading 
to other parts of Asia.
east asian sources: t 901, 959, 1169, 
mg.23079, fanxiang juan
Most of the early direct references to an Ava-
lokiteśvara with eight arms occur in Chinese 
sources. They give little information on the bo -
dhisattva’s form and function. At this stage the 
eight-armed Avalokiteśvara is encountered on the 
periphery of the ma ṇḍalas centred on other objects 
of worship, as in the abovementioned passage from 
the Kalparāja on the making of an enchanted vase. 
The bodhisattva is not yet an independent figure. 
There are also few indications as to the place of 
origin, though all such indications, discussed below, 
are compatible with the hypothesis that the eight-
armed form developed in Southeast Asia rather 
than India.
An early reference to an eight-armed form 
occurs in Atikūṭa’s Tuoloni ji jing 陀羅尼集經  
(*Dhāra ṇīsamuccaya), a compendium of invoca-
tion procedures compiled in China in 654 .41 The 
39. Bautze-Picron 2004: 239ff.
40. Yorit
omi 1990: 644ff. discusses early sources for the 
Aṣṭamahābhaya-Tārā.
41. The Tuoluoni ji jing, T 901, has no known relation 
with Sanskrit manuscripts titled *Dhāra ṇīsamuc caya  or Tuoloni ji jing is a patchwork of translations from 
Indic material, including pre-existing translations 
into Chinese and some of the Amoghapāśa lit -
erature,42 as well as original writing. The section 
referring to the eight-armed Avalokiteśvara, first 
studied by R.H. van Gulik (1935: 74–75 ), sets out 
the ‘Maṇḍala for taking up the religion of the bo-
dhisattva Hayagrīva’. Of interest here is the layout 
of the ma ṇḍala:
At the centre of this maṇḍala make a lotus seat 
seating an image of Horseneck Avalokiteśvara 
(Hayagrīva). One should make at the eastern 
doorway a lotus seat seating the Eleven-faced 
bodhisattva (Ekādaśamukha). You should 
make at the northern doorway a lotus seat seat-
ing the Eight-armed Avalokiteśvara. And the 
maṇḍala’s southern sector has no lotus seat; 
[there] make the eight serpent kings. […] The 
maṇḍala’s western gate is adjacent to the south-
ern boundary. A lit brazier sits [there].43
This maṇḍala sets the stage for the summoning 
of the lotus-clan bodhisattvas. Their mantras are 
recited and foodstuffs and flowers are burned for 
them in the brazier at the entrance to the ma ṇḍala. 
The mantra of the Eight-armed Avalokiteśvara is 
likewise specified by Atikūṭa in connection with 
this process. However, the distinctive element of the mantra has no obvious Sanskrit parallel
44 and 
*Dhāra ṇīsaṃgraha , whic h are all Nepalese anthologies, as 
far as is known at present. On the Tuoluoni ji jing’s  date 
of compilation, see Shinohara 2010: 393; on its ‘general 
maṇḍala’, see Tanaka 2019: 43–44.
42. Shinohara 2010: 404–405. A paṭav idhi from an 
‘Amoghapāśa scripture’ ( Bukong juansuo jing  不空羂索
經), which has not yet been identified, and which Atikūṭa 
seems to have translated himself, is cited in the Tuoloni ji 
jing at T 901 828a 17–c 28. See also Reis-Habito 1999: 67.
43. 其壇中心作蓮華座。 安置馬頭觀世音像。 正當東門作蓮
華 座 。安 十 一 面 菩 薩 。正 當 北 門 作 蓮 華 座 。安 八 臂 觀 世 音 。其
壇南方更無華座。 作八龍王。 […]其壇西門如近南畔。 安一火
鑪。(T 901 838a 24–27, b 7). The translation is mine.
44. 唵一 夜勢夜輸擔二 莎訶三 (T 901 838b 12). This can 
be transcribed as  om̐  jiaᴴ ɕiᴇiᴴ jiaᴴ ɕɨo tm svāhā , with 
unidentified phonemes given in reconstructed Middle 
Chinese. The character ɕɨo 輸 appears to convey the San -
skrit phoneme śu , as in the word * viśuddhi 毘輸提 , which 
Atikūṭa uses four times. The character * ʈˠiᴇp̚ 輒 (Mandarin 
zhé) is used instead of 輸 in the version of the ritual given 
in the derivative handbook (discussed below) T 1074 172a 18. 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   17 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 22] ---
Iain Sinclair18
is currently attested only in the Tuoluoni ji jing and 
its derived works.45 The obscurity of this mantra in 
the received Buddhist corpus could be an indica-
tion of origin in a relatively marginal culture, but it 
is hard to read much into this, given that so much 
of the early corpus has been lost. 
As the Tuoluoni ji jing provides the first defi-
nite notice of the eight-armed Avalokiteśvara, the 
provenance of the text calls for closer investigation. 
While more work on this is needed, it may be worth 
mentioning here that the Tuoluoni ji jing is one of 
the few tantric Buddhist texts to refer to tin, a metal 
that has long been associated with the Malay Pen-
insula.46 Tin is specified, in a passage worth quoting 
here in full, as one of five metals to be combined in 
the manufacture of vajras:
If you want to make a vajra, the first thing is 
to select metals of the five varieties. Do not use 
any melted down utensils. What are the names 
of the five? One: gold, two: silver, three: copper, 
four: iron, five: tin. [They can be] alloyed to 
make a vajra shape. If none of these five types 
[are available], lightning[-stricken] jujube 
heart[wood] can also be used. Before the vajra has been made, mantrify the material of gold, 
copper etc. 108 times, saying: *
om̐  mahākāla 
nātha kubera svāhā .47 
High levels of tin in bronze have been regarded 
as indicators of Southeast Asian provenance.48 
Certain Buddhist artefacts found in Sumatra are 
The character 夜 consistently transliterates ya or yā in  
T 901. Restorations such as * om̐  yasya śuddhaṃ svāhā ,  
*om̐ yat satyaṃ° or * om̐  yakṣāya ° could be conjectured. 
Van Gulik 1935: 75 made no attempt to transcribe the 
mantra.
45. In part
icular, the mantra has no identifiable counter -
part in the large mantric repertoire of the Kalparāja , as 
collated by the Mikkyō Seiten Kenkyūkai 2004.
46. See e.g
. Colless 1969: 22ff.
47. 若人欲作跋折囉者。 先取金等五色之物。 皆未曾經作器
用者。 何名五色。 金銀赤銅鑌鐵錫。 合和爲作跋折囉形。 若
無此五種。 可用霹靂棗心。亦得。 且未作其跋折囉前。 先  
須豫呪金銅等物一百八遍呪曰 唵一 摩訶迦囉二 那吒倶鉢
囉三 莎訶四 (T 901 803c 18–23).
48. Woodward 2003: 106–107. The question of where South 
Indian bronzes sourced their tin is discussed by Srinivasan 
2013: 168. On period Javanese bronzes with high tin content, 
see Mechling et al. 2018: 83ff.rich in tin; at least one icon of the eight-armed form 
was cast in an alloy with a very high concentration 
of tin solute.49
Avalokiteśvaras with eight arms are a common 
sight in the art of Tang Buddhism, notwithstanding 
the lack of detailed information on these figures in 
the literature of the period. Dozens of independent 
depictions are extant, especially in Nara and Heian 
sculpture, in the related iconographic compendia, 
and cloth and mural paintings from Dunhuang.50 
Hardly anything is known about why this form 
attracted such a high degree of acceptance and en-
thusiasm. In the beginning, demand for icons of the 
eight-armed form would have been driven by the 
praxis tradition of the Tuoluoni ji jing. Its Hayagrī-
vamaṇḍala was at the centre of an independent 
ritual.51 Towards the end of the 8th century, an 
eight-armed Avalokiteśvara is mentioned52 in an 
initiation manual, the Dinglunwang da mantuluo 
guanding yigui 頂輪王大曼荼羅灌頂儀軌 , com-
piled by the monk Bianhong 
 弘. Once again, this 
form of Avalokiteśvara is named as a figure on the 
periphery of a ma ṇḍala. As Bianhong had travelled 
to Tang China from Java (Heling53 訶陵 , *Kliṅ ), it 
might be wondered whether he had encountered 
the eight-armed form in his homeland. However, it 
is more likely that Bianhong took this figure from 
the Tuoluoni ji jing, which he is known to have 
drawn on in writing his manual.54
49. Ery Soedewo 2012: 157.
50. On the ei
ght-armed Amoghapāśa icons in Japan, see, 
among others, Meisezahl 1962: 265–266, Reis-Habito 1999:  
53, and Lokesh Chandra 1999: 300–301, and on those in 
Dunhuang, Nakamura 2008. See also Wong 2015.
51. The Hey
ejielipo Guanshiyin pusa shoufa tan  何耶掲
唎婆觀世音菩薩受法壇 , T 1074, is a separate treatise on 
entering the Hayagrīvamaṇḍala described in the Tuoluoni 
ji jing . Its contents are included in the Japanese Gyōrinshō  
行林抄 , T 2409, compiled in 1158. On other reuses of the 
Tuoluoni ji jing , see e.g. Reis-Habito 1999: 45. For references 
to the contemporaneous praxis tradition of the Tuoluoni 
ji jing , see Sinclair 2016a: 39.
52. Sincl
air 2016a: 53, no. 45. The reading ba bu Guanyin 
八臂觀音 is a conjectural emendation of T’s doubtful reading 
ba sheng Guanyin 八聖觀音  (T 959 328b 14). 
53. Some Mi
ddle Chinese reconstructions take the first 
character of 訶陵  to be pronounced with a velar rather 
than a glottal fricative: xal ɨŋ. Rather than reading Heling 
(e.g. Wade 2014: 31), therefore, it is possible to perceive the 
underlying word as *Kaliṅga, Kliṅ.
54. Sincl
air 2016a: 38, 39, n. 55.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   18 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 23] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back19
The East Asian depictions display a great deal 
of iconographic variation, which again points to 
a chronic lack of an associated textual standard. 
The forms of some eight-armed Amoghapāśa icons 
in Japan were clearly copied with the mediation 
of model books, not written descriptions.55 East 
Asian depictions with two opposing hands holding 
identical implements56 are unlikely to have been 
prescribed in texts originating in South Asia. Some 
depictions of the bodhisattva alternate visually 
similar implements, such as trident and tinkle-staff 
(khikkhirika). In general, such iconographic irreg-
ularities can be explained as artefacts of a primarily 
visual mode of transmission. They are typical of 
image cults that disseminate with little associat -
ed documentation. Their many variations57 are in 
effect routine occurrences. Informal variations of 
this kind do not need to be recognized as distinct 
formal traditions or, as Shunsho Manabe (2016: 
294) contends, a ‘deep mystery’. 
The coarse linguistic environment in which 
some period artisans worked can be glimpsed in a 
Dunhuang banner now kept in the Musée Guimet, 
MG.23079 . It was painted no later than 1010 , ac-
cording to its dedication, which has recently been 
studied by Henrik H. Sørensen (2020: 110–113 ). 
This banner records the first definite, if semi-lit -
erate, identification of the eight-armed form as 
Amoghapāśa. Its accompanying caption reads 
namo Bokong juansuo pusa 南无伯空卷索菩薩  in 
Mandarin. It contains a homophonic misspelling 
of Amoghapāśa’s usual Chinese name Bukong 
juansuo 不空羂索 . The painting’s main subject 
resembles the Śrīvijayan type in its general ap -
pearance and in features such as the characteristic 
noose, waterpot, and antelope-pelt shawl. However, 
it idiosyncratically holds aloft two tridents. Its 
sponsor hoped that the painting would be benefi-
cial for his ancestors, and ‘above all’ that ‘the people 
55. On the resemblance between sketches in certain Jap -
anese
 iconographic compendia and various seated eight-
armed Amoghapāśa icons produced before the end of the 
12th century, see Taniguchi 2002.
56. Examples are the mural of Dunhuang Cave 14 (Naka -
mura 2008: 227, fig. 1) and the Dunhuang banner MG.23079, 
discussed below.
57. Nakamura 2008: 226 itemizes the attributes of six- and 
eight-armed forms at Dunhuang.of the country would be at peace’.58 The premise 
of protecting a nation conceptually extends the 
notion of Avalokiteśvara as a rescuer of individuals, 
and comes up in connection with the eight-armed 
form in other contexts, examined below.
All East Asian images of or references to the 
eight-armed Avalokiteśvara can, in short, be re-
garded as descendants of the Śrīvijayan type, in -
cluding the wide variety of typologically different 
figures.59 A certain proximity to the Indo-Malay 
world is visible in the Yunnanese Scroll of Indic 
Icons (Fanxiang juan 梵像卷 ), which features one 
of the last premodern East Asian depictions of the 
Śrīvijayan type. The Scroll, painted between the 
years 1172  and 117660 in the Dali kingdom, includes 
in its large pantheon a standing Avalokiteśvara 
with eight arms (frame 95 )61 that bears a strong 
resemblance to Śrīvijayan iconography and style. 
The bodhisattva is portrayed in the Scroll with the 
expected variation in the array of arms, which again 
seems to involve graphic confusion. The bunch of 
grass held in the upper right hand could have been 
a hook or noose in the artist’s model. The forked 
branch held in the upper left hand of the figure 
in the Scroll, not seen in most other East Asian 
depictions, looks much like the trida ṇḍa codified 
at a late stage in South Asia.62 However, it is hard 
to see how a direct model for this depiction could 
have come from the subcontinent to Dali at this 
time.63 The Scroll’s eight-armed Avalokiteśvara is 
probably informed by much earlier contact with 
the Malay world, which is noticeable in Yunnan 
from the 9th century onwards.64
58. 先奉為國人安 … (Sørensen 2020: 111).
59. Miyaj
i 2000: 1256. The closest non-Chinese counter -
part of the Dunhuang images is not the Swat sculpture 
discussed by Miyaji but the Nālandā sculpture discussed 
in Bautze-Picron ibid .
60. Li 2010
: 114.
61. Soper a
nd Chapin 1970, pl. 35.
62. See below, p. 20ff. on the Śākyaśrī/Thaṃ Bahī tradition.
63. Megan Bryson (2018) argues that Dali ‘elites’ found 
it exp
edient, for the sake of asserting independence from 
China’s ruling dynasties, to give their Buddhism an ‘Indian’ 
pedigree.
64. Śrīvijaya has been identified as a stylistic influence on 
Buddhist images in the Nanzhao 南詔  kingdom, the fore -
runner of Dali, by de Mallmann ( ibid.) and thence Soper 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   19 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 24] ---
Iain Sinclair20
A form of Amoghapāśa with eight arms 
and four faces—an iconographically divergent 
but apparently related type—is described in 
one Chinese text. A description is given in the 
painting instructions of a manual on the in -
vocation of the goddess Cundā, the Chiming 
zang yuqie dajiao Zunna pusa daming chengjiu  
yigui jing 持明藏瑜伽大教尊那菩薩大明成 
就儀軌經 (*Vidyādharapiṭaka-mahāyogatantra-  
[nibaddha-]Cundāmahāvidyā-sādhanavidhi). This 
manual, translated in 994 , is loosely connected to 
the Māyājālamahātantra65 and thereby to soterio-
logical Tantrism. However, its painting procedure 
is in line with the image magic of the Amoghapāśa 
literature:
On the left side [of six-armed Cundā], on a 
lotus, draw Amoghapāśa, four-faced, eight-
armed. He has a tiger pelt for a garment, bound 
around his waist. He has a deerskin for a divine 
garment. [Each] face has three eyes. The locks 
are piled up in a jewelled crown, hanging down. 
The first right hand makes the sign of giving; 
the second hand holds a rosary; the third hand 
holds a noose; the fourth hand makes the sign 
of fearlessness. The first hand holds a white 
lotus; the second hand holds a scripture; the 
third hand makes a fist, raising the index finger to make the threatening sign; the fourth hand 
and Chapin 1970: 36–37. Similarly, Guy 1995: 78–79 and 
Bryson 2018: 94, n. 32 include Campā among the probable 
sources of Nanzhao art, particularly the *Ajaya (Acuoye 
阿嵯耶 ) Avalokiteśvara.
65. This little-studied text, extant only in Chinese 
translation, claims to be part of the great yoga doctrine 
(*mahāyogatantra ) of Mahāvairocana tathāgata  大毘盧
遮那如來瑜伽大教  (T 1169 677b 25, 684c 9). Tanaka (2016b: 
46ff.) noticed that the text contains material on Cundā’s 
nine mantradevatā s (om̐  ca le cu le cuṃ de svā hā —
corresponding to, respectively, Vairocana, Cakravartin, 
Acala, Cintāmaṇi-Avalokiteśvara, Amoghapāśa, Cundā, 
Vajrapāṇi, Ekajaṭā, Vajranakhā) in which is also given 
in Ānandagarbha’s ṭīkā  (D 2513 209ff.) on the Māyā -
jālamahātantra . Tanaka adds that T 1169 was translated 
in the same year (on which see Takeuchi 1976: 45–46) as the 
Chinese translation of the Māyājālamahātantra itself, T 890, 
indicating that the two texts could have been transmitted 
together. It can be added here that the nine mantradevatā s 
are discussed in another practical work on the system of the 
Māyājālamahātantra , a Śrīmañjuvajrodayama ṇḍalavi dhi 
of an unidentified author (D 2590, 237b).holds a hook. A blaze of light shines over the 
whole body, shimmering gloriously.66
The hand array of this four-faced, eight-armed form 
is much the same as that of the single-faced Śrīvi-
jayan icons, with the exception of the threatening 
gesture of the third left hand, corresponding to the 
waterpot. This variation could have originated in 
a visual model in which the waterpot was missing 
or malformed (e.g. 7 ). The four-faced Amoghapāśa 
of this sādhanavidhi may then be drawing on 
knowledge of the Śrīvijayan single-faced, eight-
armed form.67 However, these considerations lie 
outside the present scope. The four-faced, eight-
armed Amoghapāśa is an obscure figure, not yet 
identified in the art of the Archipelago or India, 
although there are Khmer depictions of a similar 
iconography.68 
the khmer eight-armed 
avalokiteśvaras and the 
kāraṇḍavyūha
Several Khmer depictions of eight-armed Ava-
lokiteśvaras were produced between the late 10 th 
century and the 13th century. They are later than 
the Śrīvijayan icons, and appear to have been 
modelled on them. At least one Śrīvijayan bronze 
has been ‘found on Khmer-controlled territory’ 
66. 左邊蓮華上。 畫不空羂索。 四面八臂。 以虎皮爲衣復爲  
絡腰†。復 以 鹿 皮 爲 天 衣 。面 有 三 目[。] 頂 戴 寶 冠 髮 髻 下 垂 。右
第 一 手 作 施 願 印 。第 二手 持 數 珠 。第 三 手 執 羂 索 。第 四 手 作
施 無 畏 印 。左 第 一 手 持 白 蓮 華 。第 二手 持 經 。第 三 手 作 拳 。竪
立頭指作期剋印。 第四手執鉤。 光炎遍身照耀熾盛  (T 1169 
685a 6–12). †T: 腋
67. The elaborate eighteen-armed form of Cundā de -
scribed in this manual (T 1169 679a 12–23) is known to have 
been depicted not only in India (see e.g. Paul 1987, pl. 78), 
but also in Java. See e.g. the cover of Heine-Geldern 1925, 
described on p. 21, pl. 12, and Asian Art Museum (San 
Francisco) 2006.48.a–c.
68. An eight-armed Khmer bronze reproduced in Seki 
1996: 27 AJ-16 bears a miniature Amitābha on top of its 
four heads, marking it as an Avalokiteśvara, albeit one 
that bears a different (if hard to discern) hand array. T 1169 
does not require Amoghapāśa to bear an Amitābha image 
in the crown or to be portrayed standing up; this opens up 
to investigation images that likewise lack these attributes. 
An eight-armed, three(?)-headed ‘Mahāvajranātha’ form 
is known in Nepal (Bhattacharyya 1958: 428).
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   20 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 25] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back21
(Bunker and Latchford 2011:193, 14) in good con-
dition. There are trivial iconographic differences 
between the Śrīvijayan and Khmer depictions, such 
as alternations of similar-looking objects, which 
are typical of the variation seen elsewhere. On the 
whole, the Khmer icons represent a dead end in the 
transmission of the form, in that they are not yet 
known to have impacted on later visual traditions. 
However, they may help to shed light on the early 
conception of the bodhisattva, which the Khmers 
would have inherited, according to the present hy-
pothesis, from their Malay neighbours. 
Many Khmer depictions are associated 
beyond doubt with the Kāra ṇḍavyūha. Even so, 
the Kāra ṇḍavyūha is not easily identifiable as a 
source for earlier Śrīvijayan depictions of the eight-
armed Avalokiteśvara. The text does not provide 
exact iconographic information; its narrative envi-
sions the bodhisattva taking on different forms in 
various scenarios;69 and the vagaries of its textual 
transmission—including the unique recension un -
earthed in Gilgit70—are still being worked out. The 
Sanskrit text has still not been satisfactorily edited,71 
long after the first attempt of Bhaṭṭācāryya (1872 ); 
some of the variation in the manuscript tradition 
is of potential iconographic significance.72 It is not 
known whether the Kāra ṇḍavyūha reached the 
Malay world in any form,73 but its narratives were  
 
 
69. Sakuma 2019: 76ff.
70. Mette 1
997 has edited these fragments. Facsimiles of 
the fragments were published by Mette et al. 2017.
71. The most recent edition is that of Buddhadev Bhat -
tacharya (2016). Some of its misreadings are shared with the 
e-text of the Kāra ṇḍavyūha  h osted at GRETIL (http://gretil.
sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/4_rellit/buddh/
bsu019_u.htm, last accessed 1 March 2020). For instance, 
the typo meheśvarāya  in the e-text of Kāra ṇḍavyūha  2
.9, 
which is not in GRETIL’s printed source (Vaidya 1961: 304 12), 
is also in Bhattacharya (2016: 111 19).
72. Sincl
air 2015: 436, n. 6.
73. In the view of Nihom, ‘we have ample indication that 
this work was available in the Archipelago’ (1994: 16). Yet 
it is not clear whether the Kāra ṇḍavyūha  i
s uniquely and 
definitely indicated by Nihom’s sources—primarily, the 
Old Javanese Kuñjarakar ṇa. The same g oes for mantra 
phrases in the Javanese corpus that are not unique to the 
Kāra ṇḍavyūha . S
ee also Woodward 2007, n. 28.definitely known in the Khmer Empire by the end 
of the first millennium.74
The various types of Khmer eight-armed Ava-
lokiteśvaras will be briefly surveyed here. At least 
four images are sculpted on steles that appear to 
have served as boundary markers, sīmā. In these 
objects Avalokiteśvara embodies a protective force 
at the monastic perimeter. The idea that the bo -
dhisattva energizes a sīmā with his mantra is duly 
articulated in the Hṛdaya,75 albeit in the narrower 
context of healing magic. A stele in the Walters 
Art Museum, Accession No. 25.194 , has invoca-
tions engraved on its reverse side including the 
signature ṣaḍakṣarīmahāvidyā of Avalokiteśvara 
revealed in the Kāra ṇḍavyūha,76 om̐  maṇipadme 
hūm̐ . The function of the stele as a spatial marker 
is underscored by its opening mantra directed to 
Indra, that is, to the eastern direction.77 A different 
Khmer stele featuring the eight-armed form, be -
longing to the collection of the Bangkok National 
Museum, has five figures sculpted upon it. Hiram 
Woodward (2015: 223–226 ) understands them to 
have comprised a ‘maṇḍalic schema’ arranged 
around a centre. Such boundary arrangements may 
be visible in clay sealings and moulds that depict 
temples—mostly Hevajra temples—of the Khmer  
  
74. Miyazaki 2010: 32–33 in this regard discusses allusions 
to the Kāra ṇḍavyūha ’ s soteriology in the 970 CE Chikreng 
inscription, K.417. See also Green 2014: 91ff.
75. Meise
zahl 1962: 298.
76. Pou 2002: 129 gives a transcription and translation 
of the stele, inventory number K. 1154. Woodward 2007: 
72–73 first drew attention to the inscription’s relation to 
the Kāra ṇḍavyūha. See also Miyazaki 2019: 356–357. Al-
though this mantra is uncontroversially associated with the 
Kāra ṇḍavyūha, it may be worth noting that the Kalparāja 
sets out many soundalike invocations of the form om ̐  …
padme including the mantra om ̐  maṇipadme, in one re -
cension (Mikkyō Seiten Kenkyūkai 2004: 142, No. 326).  
77. Pou ( ibid.
) reads om ̐  kṣāhā indrāya svāha . From 
the facsimile provided at The Walters’ website (http://art.
thewalters.org/detail/35298/stele-with-eight-armed-av -
alokiteshvara), the second and third syllables look to have 
anusvāra s and may be bījākṣara s reading as follows: om ̐  
kṣāṃ hoṃ indraya ( sic) svāhā . No such mantra has been 
identified in textual sources.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   21 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 26] ---
Iain Sinclair22
Empire.78 In these depictions, the eight-armed 
Avalokiteśvara occupies the middle of the lower 
section, corresponding to centre of the sīmā of the 
temple compound.
Khmer portrayals of the eight-armed Ava-
lokiteśvara show the lower left hand outstretched 
instead of the waterpot-holding hand of the Śrīvi-
jayan icons. The ‘giving’ gesture is displayed by 
a hand on each side, which could be seen as an 
apparent redundancy. Yet, as Woodward has no-
ticed,79 this double-handed iconography is most 
apt for the spectacle of Kāra ṇḍavyūha 1.3, in which 
Avalokiteśvara ‘emits ten subterranean rivers from 
his ten fingers’80 to relieve thirsty hell-beings. Late 
Khmer interest in this episode is demonstrated 
by its elaborate depiction in the reliefs at Banteay 
Chhmar.81 The Khmer icons also wield a vajra, a 
weapon that is not normally associated with Ava-
lokiteśvara and does not feature in his narratives 
in the Kāra ṇḍavyūha. The vajra in these icons, if 
it replaces the trident of the earlier visual tradition, 
would be seem to be an ad hoc attempt to interpret 
an ambiguous received iconography.
Two eight-armed Avalokiteśvaras are depict-
ed in the Kāra ṇḍavyūha narrative reliefs carved 
for the Banteay Chhmar temple complex in the 
late 12th century.82 One of the reliefs has been 
convincingly identified by Jean Boisselier83 with 
the episode in which Maheśvara and Umā ask  
Avalokiteśvara for assurances that they will  
be reborn as tathāgatas.84 The relief portrays 
78. One such ‘temple seal’ with five eight-armed figures 
in the b
ottom section—probably representing a complete 
sīmā  and an actual architecture—is reproduced in Bunker 
and Latchford 2011: 385, fig. 9.20. Another seal, National 
Museum of Cambodia Ga 5657, displays a single eight-
armed figure in the lower centre (Conti 2014: 389, fig. 15). 
See also Peter Sharrock’s chapter in the present volume.
79. Woodw
ard 2015: 222.
80. daśabhyo hastāṅgulībhyo daśa vaitara ṇīr niṣk rāmaya -
ti (ed. Bhattacharya 2016: 51 10). For a full translation, see 
Roberts and Yeshi 2013–2016 #118. See also Bhattacharya 
2001: 23.
81. Boiss
elier 2008: 308–309.
82. Sharr
ock 2007: 69–78.
83. Boisselier 1965: 77–78, 2008: 317–320. See also Miyazaki 
2019: 360.
84. See Bhaṭṭācāryya 1872: 88 8–91 3, Vaidya 1961: 303 11–304 
and Bhattacharya 2016: 110 11–111 for Sanskrit texts of the in particular the dialogue between Umā and  
Avalokiteśvara. Maheśvara, having just received 
his prophecy of enlightenment, is depicted in 
the form of Sadāśiva85 at the bodhisattva’s lower 
left side. Umā’s salutation comprises eight dis -
tinct epithets, which could be correlated with  
Avalokiteśvara’s eight hands:
Homage to Avalokiteśvara, to the great lord  
(maheśvarāya), life-giver (prā ṇaṃdadāya), 
having the best 
eye on Earth in hand 
(pṛthivīvaralocanakarāya), having the glory 
of a fair lotus (śubhapadmaśriye), surrounded 
[by followers86] (parivṛtāya), set out [towards] 
nirvā ṇa [or the bodhisattva] stage[s] (nirvā ṇa- 
bhūmisaṃprasthitāya), positive mind in hand 
(sucetanakarāya), holder of dharma (
dharma-
dharāya).87
Some of these praises relate straightforwardly to 
the regular iconography: life-giver (prā ṇaṃdada), 
i.e. varada; lotus (śubhapadmaśrī); book (dharma-
dhara). Furthermore, the sucetanakara could be 
the abhaya gesture; the maheśvara is recognizable 
by his trident; the characteristic noose or hook can 
be a means of nirvā ṇabhūmisaṃprasthita. The 
remaining two epithets (pṛth
ivīvaralocanakara , 
parivṛta) have no obvious iconographic counter -
parts, but could correspond to the sun/disc88 and 
Maheśvaranirvyūha  of the Kāra ṇḍavyūha , and Roberts and 
Yeshi (2013–2016) 2.93–96 for an English translation. Note 
that the content of the Maheśvaranirvyūha  is not clearly 
demarcated, in the recensions published to date, from the 
first half of the same prakara ṇa, 2.7, wh
ich describes Ava-
lokiteśvara’s pores.
85. Bunke
r 2011 proposes that the five-faced, ten-armed 
Khmer icons of Maheśvara generally represent Sadāśiva.
86. In the Kāra ṇḍavyūha  the word parivṛta refers to  
a retinue of followers: bhāryāputraduhitṛbhiḥ parivṛtaḥ 
(2.6, ed. Bhattacharya 2016: 104 10), dārakadārikāparivṛtā 
(2.8, ed. Bhattacharya 2016: 115 20).
87. See ed. B
haṭṭācāryya 1872: 90 11–13; Vaidya 1961: 304 12–13; 
Bhattacharya 2016: 111 19–20.
88. There is no counterpart for Umā’s praises in the 
Chinese translation of the Kāra ṇḍavyūha , b ut the same 
epithet  occurs  in the Avīciśoṣaṇa chapter, for which the 
Chinese understands pṛthivīvararocanakarāya 大地爲眼
明踰日  (T 1050 53a 18) rather than pṛthivīvaralocanakarāya . 
However, the latter agrees with Tib. sa’i spyan mchog mdzad 
pa (D 116 242b 3).
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   22 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 27] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back23
rosary carried by Avalokiteśvara in the relief. The 
architects of Banteay Chhmar in any case chose 
the eight-armed form, out of many forms in the 
local pantheon, to represent the moment at which 
Umā meets Avalokiteśvara, greets him with eight 
sobriquets and is assured of her future Buddha-
hood. As the Khmers must have understood that 
the bodhisattva’s form is related to his soteriolog-
ical function—certainly an old idea89—the form 
with eight arms could be associated more gener-
ally with the winning over of non-Buddhists. The 
second Banteay Chhmar relief that portrays the 
eight-armed Avalokiteśvara has not had its corre-
sponding narrative identified yet, but if it depicts 
the asura king Balin90 then it conveys a similar 
theme. Regrettably, neither relief is now available 
for direct study following ‘the largest looting op -
eration of Cambodian cultural property in recent 
history’, as Keiko Miura (2016: 35–38 ) has called it.91
The final form assumed by Avalokiteśvara in the 
Khmer Empire is known as Jayabuddhamahānātha 
(Fig. 2.4). The iconography of Jayabuddhamahānā-
tha fuses three elements: the Khmer eight-armed 
type, the cosmic imagery of the Kāra ṇḍavyūha, 
and the physiognomy of king Jayavarman VII 
(r. c. 1182
–1220 ). The eight-armed base form is 
much the same as earlier Khmer depictions. The 
visual element from the Kāra ṇḍavyūha is the suf-
fusion of the body with small figures representing 
the myriad bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas and 
89. Apart from Avalokiteśvara’s shapeshifting power, set 
out in the Saddharmapu ṇḍarīka , th e notion of appearing 
in different forms for different gati  was being taught by the 
6th century (Reis-Habito 1999: 41). Similarly, there is the 
conception of the six-armed Avalokiteśvara as the saviour 
of the entire ṣa ḍgati ( Miyaji 2000: 1261, fig. 9).
90. One reason for supposing that this 
relief depicts the 
meeting between the warrior Balin and Avalokiteśvara 
(Kāra ṇḍavyūha 1.11) is that the figure to the right of Av -
alokiteśvara holds a prominent weapon. This episode in -
volves another ‘winning hearts and minds’ encounter and 
the recital of a stotra containing similar epithets. Before 
Balin meets with Avalokiteśvara, he is trapped by a mul -
ti-armed form of Nārāyaṇa, portrayed as eight-armed in 
one Nepalese illuminated manuscript (Sakuma 2007: 179, 
fig. 3).
91. Sharrock 2015: 77 provides visual identification of the 
looted reliefs.buddhas residing in Avalokiteśvara’s pores.92 As 
for the facial features of these statues, they resem-
ble the presumed portrait statues of Jayavarman 
VII.93 This hybrid figure has been identified by 
Woodward with the Jayabuddhamahānātha icons 
that Jayavarman VII had installed in twenty-five 
locations named in the Preah Khan inscription  
(K. 908).94 This identification has been questioned,95 
but there are no better explanations for the Khmer 
buddha-permeated Avalokiteśvara statues. Several 
of these statues were found at the particular spots 
of Jayabuddhamahānātha installations specified in 
the Preah Khan inscription.96 Jayavarman VII had 
92. Previously the visual element of suffusion had been 
seen as Buddhas ‘radiating’. This element instead represents 
the Buddha-filled pores of the bodhisattva spoken of in the 
first part of Kāra ṇḍavyūha  2.7, trans. Roberts and Yeshi 
(2013–2016 #2.80–89).
93. National Museum of Cambodia Ka.1703 (for bibli -
ography, see e.g. Dalsheimer 2001: 157–160) is one of the 
quintessential portrait statues of Jayavarman VII. All such 
portrait statues have missing arms but are assumed to have 
posed in a seated meditation posture.
94. For rec
ent identifications of the locations named in 
connection with Jayabuddhanātha in K. 908 vv. 104–121, 
see Wyatt 2001: 15–17. To explain K. 908 first mentioning 
twenty-three installation sites ( trayoviṃśatideśeṣv […] 
atiṣṭhipat , v. 120cd), then twenty-five ( pañcaviṃśatideśakāḥ , 
v. 159b)—as noticed by Jacques 2005: 14—Maxwell 2007: 
95 opines that ‘two more [sites] were set up while work on 
the inscription proceeded.’
95. The elements of the name Jayabuddhamahānātha have 
been discussed by Woodward and Douglas 1994–1995: 105 
and Maxwell 2007: 82. With regard to the -buddha- element, 
Jacques (2005: 13) objects: ‘La difficulté ici est qu’il n’est pas 
possible de confondre Buddha et Avalokiteśvara’. In the 
Kāra ṇḍavyūha , of cou rse, Avalokiteśvara incorporates 
Buddha bodies in a typical example of late Mahāyāna recur -
sive imagery. And Avalokiteśvara icons themselves include 
the figure of the Buddha Amitābha (explicitly labelled as 
such in the case of the Candi Jago pantheon, discussed 
below).
96. The findspots of the buddha-pore-filled Avalokiteś -
varas include Phetchaburi i.e. Jayavajrapurī (K. 908 v. 
117a, cf. Woodward and Douglas 1994–1995: 108, 110, n. 
12 #15); Ratchaburi i.e. Jayarājapurī (K. 908 v.116c, cf. 
Woodward 1994–95: 107, 109, n. 12 #11; Miyazaki 2010: 
Map 1-2); Prasat Muang Singh in Kanchanaburi (Mi -
yazaki 2010: Map 1-1), identified with Jayasiṃhapurī (K. 
908 v. 116d; cf. Woodward 1994–95: 105; Wyatt 2001: 15,  
n. 23); and Preah Khan itself (Miyazaki 2010: Map 1-10), 
where inscription K. 908 was installed. For additional 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   23 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 28] ---
Iain Sinclair24
these images installed in state-supported temples 
to effect an ‘exact reversal of the kind of Hindui -
sation of Buddha images that used to take place 
before Jayavarman’s reign’, in the view of Thomas 
Maxwell (2007: 83 ). 
By the time the Jayabuddhamahānātha sculp -
tures were being produced, no new images of the 
eight-armed Avalokiteśvara appear to have been 
made in the Malay Archipelago for almost two cen -
turies. If this form had once enjoyed the support 
of Śrīvijaya’s rulers, it might likewise have been 
pushed out of favour by some high-level disruption. 
The 1025  Cōḻa invasion could well be the event that 
put an end to the production and veneration of 
eight-armed Avalokiteśvaras among the Malays. 
This invasion had long-term effects on the region, 
including its sudden and permanent removal from 
certain Buddhist pilgrimage circuits.97 Little can be 
said about how much of the bodhisattva’s Śrīvi-
jayan cult carried over to the Khmer milieu. With 
the destruction of Mahāyāna Buddhism in Thailand 
and Cambodia after the death of Jayavarman VIII 
(r. 1243–1295 ),98 the eight-armed form reached its 
end of life in the Angkor Empire. Nonetheless, by 
this time it had already been revived in the Malay 
Archipelago through a transmission coming back 
from South Asia.
śākyaśrībhadra, vibhūticandra and 
thamel
The first sightings of the eight-armed Avalokiteśvara  
on the subcontinent occur almost six centuries 
after the advent of the form in Maritime Southeast 
Asia. They are conveyed by Śākyaśrī, also known 
as Śākyaśrībhadra (d. 1225), and Vibhūticandra  
(fl. 1204–1248). These two pa ṇḍitas fled the de -
discussion see Woodward (2003: 211–213). Many sites 
named in K. 908 remain unidentified (Wyatt 2001: 15, 
n. 24), leaving ample room for further identifications of 
findspots and installation sites. Note also that not all Jaya- 
buddhamahānāthas are of the ‘buddha-permeated’ type.
97. On the di
sappearance of Śrīvijaya and Kedah from 
sites portrayed in South Asian illuminated manuscripts, 
see Peter Sharrock’s contribution in the present volume. 
On other such effects, see Sen 2009: 68–69.
98. For some background, see Woodward 2003: 204–205.
Fig. 2.4: Jayabuddhamahānātha, ehe Eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa with the face of Jayavarman VII and 
buddha-filled pores over the torso. Sandstone, 
Bangkok National Museum. Findspot: Lopburi. 
Photograph (‘050 Avalokitesvara’ , https://www.
photodharma.net/Thailand/  Nation
al-Museum/
images/050-Avalokitesvara-13c-Lopburi-Original.jpg) 
by Anandajyoti Bhikkhu, CC BY 2.0.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   24 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 29] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back25
struction of Vikramaśīla-mahāvihāra in Eastern 
India and escaped to Tibet in 1204. Śākyaśrībhadra 
describes the eight-armed form in two original 
works: a full-length sādhana edited by Vibhūtican-
dra and an abbreviated sādhana. Vibhūticandra 
also composed an independent visualization hand -
book. These three works are extant only in Tibetan 
translation—Q 4840, 3682 and 4841, respectively.99 
The Tibetan translations of Śākyaśrī’s and Vi- 
bhūticandra’s sādhanas provide vital information 
on the movement of the eight-armed Amoghapāśa 
into South Asia. They are associated in particular 
with Thaṃ Bahī, the monastic complex that gives 
present-day Thamel in Kathmandu its name.100 
Thaṃ Bahī incorporates the Nepalese branch 
of Vikramaśīla founded by Atiśa (982–1055) in 
1042.101 It often served as a base for non-Newar 
monks, like other monasteries of the bahī class. 
The colophon of the translation of Vibhūticandra’s 
sādhana records that it was completed at Thaṃ 
Bahī; Śākyaśrī’s long sādhana was most likely trans -
lated there as well.102 
99. Śākyaśrībhadra’s ’Ph ags pa don yod zhags pa’i sgrub 
thabs (*Amoghapāśalokeśvarasādhana ), Q 4840, has been 
conveyed as an ‘abstract in English’ by Pal (1966: 235) and 
translated in full by Meisezahl (1967: 477–481) together 
with the iconographic section of Vibhūticandra’s sādhana  
of the same title, Q 4841 ( ibid.: 482). Meisezahl did not 
notice the shorter work attributed to Śākyaśrī, translated 
into Tibetan with the title Don yod zhags pa’i sgrub thabs 
mdor bsdus pa , Q 3682 / D 2861.
100. Thaṃ Bahī comprises both Dharmadhātu-vihāra, a 
royal monastery predating the mid-11th century, and the 
local branch of Vikramaśīla-mahāvihāra. The word bahī  
was not originally synonymous with vihāra ; it designates 
an ‘outside(r)’ ( bahis ) institution (Sinclair 2016b: 49). The 
Newar name of the complex (cognate with * uttama-bahis ) 
indicates its position relative to old Kathmandu ( ibid.: 136).
101. As the name ‘Atiśa’ is used consistently, with this 
spelling, in Tibetan sources—which provide most of the 
primary sources for his life—this will be the spelling 
adopted here. On the Sanskrit alternative *Adhīśa, see 
Sinclair (2016b: 54, n. 54).
102. The colophon to the translation of Vibhūticandra’s 
sādhana states: […] dpal bhi bu ti tsandra’i zhal snga nas/ 
blo(glo) bo loccha ba dge slong shes rab rin chen gyis bal yul 
thang gi bhi har gyi gtsug lag khang du […] (Q 4841, Dpe 
bsdur ma ed. 62 4–5). Vibhūticandra and his collaborator, 
the Mustang Translator (NB: the correction of blo bo to 
glo bo, conjectured by Schoterman 1994: 158, is supported 
by the Narthang edition of the text), worked together on Śākyaśrī’s descriptions conform to the Śrīvi -
jayan type in almost all details. He says that the 
bodhisattva has one face and eight arms, holds 
a rosary and noose, makes unfearing and giving 
gestures with the four right arms, and holds in 
the left arms a lotus with its stalk, a book, a three-
branched staff, and a waterpot.103 Śākyaśrī places 
the noose on the left rather than the right side, 
while the object that looks like a trident or hook 
in some Śrīvijayan images is replaced with a three-
branched staff (dbyug pa rtze gsum, trida ṇḍa). This 
specification eliminates the possibility that the bo-
dhisattva holds a trident, an attribute that is seen 
in a few early depictions and is consistent with the 
iconographic programme of the Kalparāja. Instead, 
Śākyaśrī’s visualization has a certain consistency, 
in that the bodhisattva’s attributes reflect the at -
tributes of the retinue figures. The three-branched 
staff, waterpot, rosary, and abhaya gesture are dis-
played by Bhṛkuṭī; Tārā displays varada and lotus; 
Sudhana holds the book; the tiger pelt is seen on 
Hayagrīva; the noose remains Amoghapāśa’s sig-
nature object.104 In other respects, Śākyaśrī’s and 
Vibhūticandra’s visions of Amoghapāśa follow the 
Śrīvijayan type. They all refer to the unusual tiger 
pelt wrapped over the dhoti.105 Both authors would 
the translation of Śākyaśrī’s Amoghapāśasādhana at an 
unspecified place (Q 4840, Dpe bsdur ma ed. 62 6–7). The 
place of translation is more likely to have been Thaṃ Bahī 
than Pu rang, another workplace of the Mustang Translator 
(cf. Stearns 1996: 135, 160), located in Tibet. This is because 
Śākyaśrī’s translation was transmitted with interlinear ref-
erences to the sādhana of Vibhūticandra translated at Thaṃ 
Bahī: e.g. g.yon gyi bla ma bhi bhu ti’i phyag dpe la … (Q 4840, Dpe bsdur 
ma ed. 54 21).
103. zhal gc
ig phyag brgyad pa/ g.yas kyi phyag bzhi na 
phreng ba dang zhags pa dang/ mi ’ jigs pa sbyin pa dang/ 
mchog sbyin pa’o/ g.yon gyi phyag bzhi na/ pad ma dkar 
po’i sdong bu dang/ po ti dang/ yal ga gsum pa’i dbyug pa 
dang/ spyi blugs ’dzin pa’o (Q 4840, Dpe bsdur ma ed. p. 
54 18–55 5). See also Meisezahl (1967: 479).
104. Cf. trans. Meisezahl 1967: 479–480 and Pal 1966, and 
for comparison, the present Appendix 2.1.2–6. According 
to Q 4840, Dpe bsdur ma ed. p. 55 11–12, Sudhana holds ‘a 
skullcup with left and right’ (g.yas dang ... g.yon pas ... ka 
pā li dang), which Meisezahl translates literally and Pal 
overlooks. Presumably the ‘skullcup’ corresponds to the 
cupped hands (*puṭa) of Sudhana’s kṛtāñjalipuṭa.
105. Accor
ding to Śākyaśrī, the pelt is ‘under’ the dhoti: 
na bza’ dkar po zung gis spras pa’i stag gi lpags pas smad 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   25 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 30] ---
Iain Sinclair26
have been describing objects that they could see, 
not reworking the old sources for Amoghapāśa. 
For instance, they identify the scripture held by 
Amoghapāśa as a book of the Prajñāpāramitā, but 
to be consistent with the iconographic programme 
of the Kalparāja, this object should be a book of 
the Hṛdaya.106
Śākyaśrī reports that he encountered the eight-
armed Amoghapāśa at Bodhgaya. He had a vision 
of the bodhisattva surrounded by attendants 
during the fasting day (poṣadha) to recover from an 
illness.107 This incident, first discussed by Jan Scho-
terman (1994: 158 ), took place during Śākyaśrī’s 
final flight out of India around the end of the 12 th 
century. As Śākyaśrī was describing a form that had 
been in existence for centuries, his ‘vision’ (zhigs, 
*darśana) appears to have involved the sighting of 
a physical object. This interpretation is compatible 
with his claim to have been inspired by a ‘vision in 
a dream’ (gzims nas bzhugs pa’i tshe). Yet no eight-
armed Amoghapāśa has survived at Bodhgaya or anywhere else in India. Any depiction of the form 
there would most likely have been a late arrival. 
Pilgrims from Maritime Southeast Asia were, in 
this regard, becoming more frequent at Bodhgaya 
during Śākyaśrī’s lifetime. According to Tāranātha 
(1575–1634 ), ‘their number went on increasing so 
that during the time of the four Senas about half 
the monks of Magadha were from Ko-ki’108—that is, 
bkris pa (Q 4840, Dpe bsdur ma ed. p. 55 5–6). This seems to 
mean that the tiger pelt is positioned below ( smad , *adhas ) 
the dhoti, i.e. vertically lower than the knot, as is seen on 
early images with pelt depictions. The abbreviated sādhana , 
Q 3682, simply mentions the two garments: stag gi pags pas 
smad dkris pa . Vibhūticandra refers only to the tiger pelt: 
stag lpags kyi sham thabs bkris pa (Q 4841, Dpe bsdur ma 
ed. p. 61 6–7). See also Meisezahl op. cit .
106. The sixt
een-armed form is described as […] pā ṇinā 
[…] tṛ
tīyena amoghapāśapustakam ( Kalparāja MS f. 45a 3, 
via Suzuki, Ōtsuka and Kimura 2000: 61).
107. For cl
arity, the whole account is given here: rdo rje 
gdan na bzhugs pa’i tshe sku khams bag tsam ma bde nas 
dpyid zla ’bring po’i tshes brgyad la gso sbyong la gnas pa 
dang nam gyi brgyad cha tsam lus pa na gzims nas bzhugs 
pa’i tshe/ ’phags pa don yod zhags pa ’khor dang bcas pa 
gzims nas bzhugs pa zhal mngon sum du gzigs nas bzhengs 
pa dang de bzhengs par zhal bstan te sku khams kyang dangs 
nas sgrub thabs ’di mdzad do (Q 4840, Dpe bsdur ma ed. 
p. 58 10–15).
108. Chattopadhyaya and Chimpa 1967: 330, with the 
authors’ asterisk marks removed.from ‘Cochin’, a metonym for mainland Southeast 
Asia.109 Tāranātha’s report is borne out to some 
extent by the enthusiastic projects to replicate 
Bodhgaya in Pegu and Siam after the 14 th cen -
tury.110 It is then possible that the image seen at 
Bodhgaya by Śākyaśrī had been brought there by 
visitors from mainland or maritime Southeast Asia.
Vibhūticandra also apparently describes an 
image seen with his own eyes, in that he gives detail 
not provided by Śākyaśrī or in any pre-existing 
source, but which some Śrīvijayan icons display. 
His ideal form has a lotus stalk held at the chest  
with the flower at ear level (gnyis pa na rna ba la  
rig pa’i padma dkar po’i sdong bu thugs kar bzung 
ba; cf. 5 , 14, 20), and no ornaments (rgyan med ma; 
cf. 3, 8, 9).111 The model for his description may 
have been located at Thaṃ Bahī, as Vibhūticandra 
spent much of his time in exile there, eventually 
becoming its abbot.112 As for Śākyaśrī, it is likely 
that he knew that the eight-armed form had not 
been codified before, and this understanding may 
have motivated him to write his sādhana. There is 
no reference to an Amoghapāśa with eight arms  
in the visualization digests that were circulating at 
the time, particularly in the Sādhanasamuccaya, a 
manuscript of which Śākyaśrī had copied in north-
ern Lalitpur in 1216.113 Likewise, the Abhisama-  
yamuktāmālā of Mitrayogin (Q 5022 ), compiled no 
109. Tibetan Ko ki  is the old toponym Jiaozhi  交趾 , 
‘Cochin’, pronounced Giaochỉ in Sino-Vietnamese (Ferlus 
2009: 4). The countries that Tāranātha understands to 
comprise Cochin are discussed in brief by MacDonald 
1970: 196.
110. McKeo
wn 2010: 57–110.
111. Q 4841, Dpe bsdur ma ed. p. 61, trans. Meisezahl 
1967: 482. According to Vibhūticandra, the eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa also has flowers in the hair ( dbu la me tog gi 
phreng ba can ), an unusual detail that is only seen in the 
Varendra Research Museum MS illumination discussed 
in section 1.7. 
112. Stear
ns 1996: 137.
113. The sponsor of MS Cambridge Add.1648 is identi -
fied as śrīkumbhatīrthamahāvihārīya śākyaśrīsthavira-
ānandaśrījñāna . This part of the colophon (f. 338r 5) was 
omitted from Bendall’s description (1883: 154–155) and has 
been overlooked in studies of Śākyaśrī’s life (he is supposed 
to have returned to Kashmir in 1214; cf. Stearns 1996: 135). 
For further discussion of this colophon and Kumbhatīrtha, 
i.e. present-day Kumbheśvara in Lalitpur, see Sinclair 2017: 
viii–ix § 23.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   26 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 31] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back27
later than the early 1200 s,114 has no record of the 
form. As these digests are wide-ranging in scope, 
bringing together hundreds of visualization pro-
cedures, they provide a compelling argument from 
silence, namely, that the eight-armed Amoghapāśa 
had not been noticed on the subcontinent before 
this time. 
From the artistic corpus it is apparent that the 
eight-armed form began to be depicted in Nepal 
only from the beginning of the 13th century. The 
earliest known Nepalese portrayal is a painting on 
a manuscript cover (HAR 73801 ) that was probably 
produced no later than this time.115 There is also 
a manuscript illumination which, although East 
Indian in its style, could have been produced or 
procured in Nepal in the same period (see the next 
section). From the 14 th century onwards, statues 
114. Sinclair 2016b: 282.
115. This depiction of Amoghapāśa (figure 5) is seated, 
presumably in order to fit the vertically restricted format 
of the manuscript cover. However, its pose is visually dis -
similar to the only seated Malayo-Javanese sculpture ( 21) 
and it holds odd objects in two hands. Pratapaditya Pal 
(2001: 196) asserts ‘a twelfth-century date’ for this painting 
‘because of the palaeography’ of the MS kept within the 
covers, but it is doubtful that the date could be narrowed 
to within a century on the basis of the writing style alone. 
See also Sinclair 2016b: 151.Fig. 2.5: Seated Eight-armed Amoghapāśa. Pigments 
on wood, Nepal, c. late 12th or early 13th century. 
Hand drawing based on HAR 73801.
Fig. 2.6: Eight-armed Amoghapāśa with retinue figures 
(Sudhana and Tārā, left; Bhṛkuṭī and Hayagrīva, right), 
vignettes and donor portraits of aṣṭamīvrata devotees. 
Painting on cloth, damaged, c. 17 th century. On public 
display at Thaṃ Bahī (Thamel), Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Photograph by Iain Sinclair, 2007.
and paintings of the eight-armed form were pro-
duced in Nepal in great numbers.116 The earliest 
dated depiction was painted in 1361 .117
Could the eight-armed form have reached 
Thaṃ Bahī before the 13th century, in the wake of 
Atiśa’s famous journey to the Malay Archipelago? 
This seems unlikely in view of the invisibility of 
the form in the pre-existing literary and artistic 
corpora. Nonetheless, the possibility of a connec-
tion with Atiśa is worth exploring further. Another 
116. Lokesh Chandra 1999: 307 lists some examples, not 
incl
uding a number of gilt bronzes dated to the 14th and 
15th centuries that were recently auctioned (e.g. HAR 8322, 
12948, 13090, 13509, 41061).
117. Lokesh C
handra ibid .; Tuladhar-Douglas 2006: 183.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   27 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 32] ---
Iain Sinclair28
form of Avalokiteśvara distinctively associated 
with Atiśa was worshipped at Thaṃ Bahī for a 
time. This form, called ’Phags pa bcu gcig zhal 
’jigs pa brgyad skyobs in Tibetan, incorporates 
the iconography of the Eight Great Fears and is 
the subject of a painting (HAR 5018 ) consecrat -
ed at the monastery in 1509 .118 The eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa was already established in the local 
performance tradition by this time, as it occupies 
the central position at the bottom of the painting. 
A cloth painting of the eight-armed Amoghapāśa, 
painted in the 17 th century and now in a poor state 
of preservation, is still displayed at Thaṃ Bahī on 
special occasions. 
a bengali/nepalese manuscript 
illumination of amoghapāśa
The first, last, and only known depiction of the 
standing eight-armed Avalokiteśvara that can be 
associated with India appears in an illuminated 
Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā manuscript119 now 
kept in the Varendra Research Museum, Rajshahi, 
Bangladesh (No. 851 , f. 255 b120; Siddhanta 1979: 
392). There is a distinct possibility, however, that 
this lone ‘Indian’ depiction was produced in Nepal. 
118. The painting, consecrated at thaṃ bahīri deśa, depicts 
a thousand-armed Avalokiteśvara (sahasrabhūjaḥ lokyeś -
vara; sic) described in an ‘oral instruction of Atīśa’ (Willson 
and Brauen 2000: 269). See also Sinclair 2016b: 159.
119. This manuscript is catalogued in Siddhanta 1979: 
385–400 and is described in Melzer and Allinger 2012: 
263, P16. More recently see (especially on its iconographic 
programme) Indian Museum and McCullough 2015; and 
Tanaka 2016a.
120. Tanak
a 2016a: 125.The manuscript has been assigned to the late Sena 
period, namely, the early 13 th century, on the basis 
of the style of its miniatures.121 However, the manu-
script was an object of worship in Nepal and had a 
16th-century Nepalese postcolophon added to it.122 
The miniature of the eight-armed Avalokiteśvara 
is instantly recognizable as the Śrīvijayan type. 
Some of the bodhisattva’s hands lack the usual 
attributes (book, staff, noose), indicating that the 
miniature once again seems to be an eye copy of a 
visual model painted without reference to a written 
standard. 
As some of the figures depicted in the manu -
script remain hard to identify, the question arises 
as to where the illuminator had been working. 
Kimiaki Tanaka (2016 a: 127–128 ) has noticed that 
the format of the manuscript is horizontally much 
narrower (33 .5 cm in width) than most Pāla-Sena 
manuscripts (which measure up to 58  cm in width). 
It is rather more typical of what Tanaka calls ‘Nep-
alese domestic substitutes’ for the long palm-leaf 
writing surfaces of Eastern India. These ‘substi -
tutes’ came into wider use after the 12th century, 
as communications with Eastern Indian monas -
teries dwindled to their end. Even though the il-
luminator of the Varendra manuscript is painting 
in Bengali style, he could well have been working 
in the Kathmandu Valley. This is a typical case of 
uncertainty in determining ‘the exact provenance 
121. Tanaka 2016a: 119, 127.
122. Melzer and Allinger 2012: 257 transcribe the post -
colophon of the MS, dated 1575–1576. It was once in the 
custody of a non-celibate monk ( gṛhādhivāsitaśākyabhikṣu ; 
cf. Sinclair 2016b: 243) called *Jayalakṣa from Tarumū -
la-mahāvihāra in central Kathmandu.Fig. 2.7: Eight-armed Amoghapāśa. Miniature, pigments on palm leaf, c. early 13th century, Eastern India or 
Nepal. Varendra Research Museum MS 851 f.255b. Photograph by Tanaka Kimiaki, reproduced with permission 
of Md. Abdul Kuddus.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   28 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 33] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back29
of many North Indian manuscripts belonging to 
this period’ (Delhey 2012: 58 ). 
candi jago, gautamaśrībhadra, and 
the indo-malay kings
The last images of the eight-armed Amoghapāśa 
made in the Malayo-Javanese world are copies of 
a funerary statue of the Siṅhasāri king Viṣṇuvar-  
dhana (r. 1248–1268 ). The primary stone image 
of Viṣṇuvardhana was enshrined at Candi Jago in 
East Java.123 The images modelled after this arche-
type—produced in the same period and as part 
of the associated cult—include five small bronze 
plaques and a sculpture with two inscriptions set 
up at Padang Roco, West Sumatra, in 1286 .124 The 
creation of this set of images is credited by name 
to Viṣṇuvardhana’s son and dynastic successor 
Kṛtanagara (r. 1268–1292 ). These eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa depictions constitute some of the 
most distinctive and accomplished Buddhist art 
produced in the Malay Archipelago. The literature 
on them is vast. Yet the question at the core of their 
conception has hardly been considered: why was 
the eight-armed Amoghapāśa chosen, at that point 
in time, to personify the king of Java?
Although the eight-armed form had been 
widely depicted across the Archipelago before the 
Siṅhasāri period, it was not necessarily a natural 
choice for identification with the Javanese ruler. 
The regnal name Viṣṇuvardhana is straightfor-
wardly evoked by the figure of the aṣṭabāhu Viṣṇu, 
but there seem to have been few immediate oppor-
tunities for further identification with the eight-
armed Amoghapāśa. Some of the Śrīvijayan statues 
are large, sumptuous objects (13 –18) that appear 
to have been state-sponsored; however, none of 
these statues come from Java. The Śrīvijayan corpus 
shows that no new images had been made in the 
region for well over two centuries before Candi 
Jago was built. The cult associated with the Śrīvi -
jayan images was defunct by this time, if the extant 
corpus can be taken as a guide. The regime that 
123. Schoterman 1994; Reichle 2007.
124. The base inscription was first deciphered by N.J. 
Krom. The text of the inscription published by Ferrand 
1922:  123 is referred to here.propitiated the eight-armed Amoghapāśas across 
the Malay world seems to have been long gone by 
the 13 th century. 
The Jago figures have distinct commonalities 
with the iteration of the eight-armed form that 
had recently spread in South Asia. While Candi 
Jago’s statues and statuettes display some stylistic 
continuity with the Śrīvijayan bronzes, as seen in 
details such as the tiger pelt and jewelled waistband, 
they also differ markedly from them. In particu -
lar, the Candi Jago icons all feature the trida ṇḍa 
rather than the triśūla or other alternatives seen 
in the early corpus. As such, the iconographic 
programme of Candi Jago is not an unmodified 
continuation of a local visual tradition. Aspects 
Fig. 2.8: King Viṣṇuvardhana as the Eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa, together with Tārā and Sudhana (left), 
Hayagrīva and Bhṛkuṭī (right), and the five Tathāgatas 
and their consorts. Stone with inscriptions and 
separate inscribed base, Eastern Java, 1285. National 
Museum, Jakarta, found at Padang Roco, Sumatra. 
Photograph (‘142 Unknown’ , URL: https://flickr.com/
photos/64337707@N07/23121472509) by Anandajyoti 
Bhikkhu, CC BY 2.0. 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   29 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 34] ---
Iain Sinclair30
of it appear to have been either innovative or im-
ported from outside the region. This possibility of 
importation is consistent with findings that the 
Siṅhasāri sculptures were crafted under the ‘influ-
ence of sculpture made during the Pāla and Sena 
dynasties’ (Lunsingh Scheurleer 2008: 297 ).
The sādhana composed by Śākyaśrī has 
been nominated as the direct source for the 
Viṣṇuvardhana memorial Amoghapāśas by Scho-
terman. Schoterman managed to establish that 
the sādhana was written some decades before the 
construction of Candi Jago, but offered no expla-
nation as to how this visualization tradition could 
have reached Indonesia.125 Furthermore, Śākyaśrī’s 
vision diverges from that of the Jago figures. The 
Jago tradition depicts a fourteen-deity tableau, 
which is described as such (*caturdaśātmaka) in 
the Padang Roco statue base inscription. Here 
Amoghapāśa is conceived in connection with 
the five tathāgatas, their four consorts, and the 
four attendants Sudhana, Hayagrīva, Tārā and 
Bhṛkuṭī. All fourteen appear in all the Jago-relat -
ed representations. By contrast, neither the five 
tathāgatas nor the four consorts feature in the 
visualization texts of Śākyaśrī and Vibhūticandra. 
The tathāgatas and consorts are not mentioned by 
name in these texts,126 nor are their mantras given. 
The iconographic details of the whole retinue could 
not be taken ‘as read’ in the full-length meditation 
programme set out by Śākyaśrī. As the Candi Jago 
pantheon consistently depicts Amoghapāśa in a 
fourteen-deity tableau, it is doubtful that Śākyaśrī’s 
tradition could be its direct model. 
The Siṅhasāri depictions can be connected to 
the praxis of the subcontinent by their display of a 
trida ṇḍa, an object that is codified for the first time 
in the Śākyasrī visualization tradition. However, 
the trida ṇḍa is idiosyncratically represented in the 
125. ‘The date of Śākyaśrībhadra […] does not impede a 
poss
ible connection with […] Jago […] but the possibility 
of such a connection remains to be proven or at least made 
plausible’ (Schoterman 1994: 158).
126. In Śākyaśrī’s sādhana s, Am itābha in Amoghapāśa’s 
crown shimmers with the light of the five tathāgata s 
(Q 4840, trans. Meisezahl 1967: 479; D 2861 199b 4). The 
tathāgata s’ consorts are not mentioned, nor could 
their details be taken as read in a formal fourteen-  
figure tableau.Siṅhasāri figures as three rods held together like a 
fasces, whereas other depictions represent it more 
intuitively as a three-branched staff. The offbeat 
representation of the trida ṇḍa in the Candi Jago 
figures could not have resulted from the miscopy-
ing of a visual model. Instead, it looks to have come 
out of a naïve attempt to interpret a written source. 
From this it would seem that new textual material 
related to Amoghapāśa had somehow reached Java, 
but was inexpertly interpreted in the creation of the 
Candi Jago pantheon. 
One person was especially well positioned to 
transmit Śākyaśrī’s tradition to the Malay Archi -
pelago: Gautamaśrībhadra (fl. 1248–1255 ), also 
known as Gautamaśrī. This Bengali mahāpa ṇḍita 
is located in the Malay world by an inscription on 
the island of Karimun Besar, Riau, which gives 
his name, Mahāyāna religiosity and title.127 The 
inscription was probably written after the 1255  
earthquake that damaged Gustala-vihāra,128 Gau-
127. Sinclair 2018 and forthcoming.
128. Sincl
air ibid.; Graldi 2019: 260–262.
Fig. 2.9: The idiosyncratically shaped trida ṇḍa held 
by Amogh
apāśa in the Candi Jago pantheon. Line 
drawing based on the bronze Amoghapāśa plaque 
(detail) of the Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde, 
Leiden, RV-2630-1.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   30 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 35] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back31
tamaśrī’s base in Lalitpur, Nepal. Gustala-vihāra is 
still part of the eponymous Guitaḥ Bahī129 monastic 
complex located there. It is likely that Vibhūtican-
dra and Gautamaśrī had been in contact in this 
very place; a 1248  inscription at Guitaḥ mentions 
Vibhūticandra.130 According to Tibetan lineage 
documents, Gautamaśrī studied Raviśrījñāna’s 
Amṛtaka ṇikā commentary with Vibhūticandra,131 
129. The Newar word gusatala is an ar chaic form of guitaḥ . 
It appears to have originally referred to flat ground ( tala) on 
a hill (old Newar gu-sa , contemporary gu-y ). This is an apt 
description of the monastery’s location. On the antiquity 
of Buddhism at the site, see Graldi 2019.
130. Sincla
ir 2016b:  236.
131. Accor
ding to the c. 1360 gsan yig of Bu ston (1290–
1364), this commentarial tradition stemmed directly from 
the commentator Raviśrījñāna: re wi shrī / bi bhu ti / go tam who had written his own subcommentary, the 
Udyotanibandha, which is still extant in Sanskrit. 
Gautamaśrī also studied with Vibhūticandra’s 
student Vijayarakṣita.132
Gautamaśrī had other circumstantial connec-
tions with the nascent eight-armed Amoghapāśa 
cult in Nepal. Within the monastic complex 
at Guitaḥ there is an alcove for religious praxis 
(dharmāgāra) that traditionally houses an 
shrī (sic; Sinclair forthcoming). See also Stearns (1996: 138) 
on Vibhūticandra’s studies of the Kālacakra ṣa ḍaṅgayog a. 
132. A line of teaching on the rnam rgyal rtog pa (the 
*Vijayakalpa ) reached Bu ston (c. 1360) via Gautamaśrī by 
way of Vibhūticandra’s disciple Vijayarakṣita: dzi na shrī/ 
bi bhu ti tsandra/ bi dza ya rakṣi ta/ gau ta ma shrī/ bla ma 
nyi ma’i zhabs las (Sinclair forthcoming).
Fig. 2.10: Eight-armed Amoghapāśa housed behind glass in the dharmārama  of 
Guitaḥ Bahī, Lalitpur, Nepal. Painted clay figure consecrated in 2010. (Photograph by 
Aurora Graldi, 2012)
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   31 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 36] ---
Iain Sinclair32
Amoghapāśa image.133 The alcove at Guitaḥ Bahī 
is large enough to accommodate the tall wooden 
icons of the eight-armed Amoghapāśa that began 
to be produced in Nepal from the 13 th century 
onwards.134 It is still used for housing large 
Amoghapāśa icons; a new image was recently in -
stalled there. The inscription mentioning Vibhūti-
candra can still be seen on the base of a caitya just 
a few metres from the alcove. Gautamaśrī would 
have known about the ritual that was becoming 
tied to the eight-armed Amoghapāśa—namely, the 
tantric poṣadha—through his knowledge of the Kri-
yāsamuccaya.135 The tantric poṣadha ritual set out 
in this huge digest does not involve Amoghapāśa 
directly, but it is structurally very similar to that of 
the Poṣadhavidhāna, a dedicated handbook for the 
ritual used at Thaṃ Bahī in the late 13 th century.136 
The ritual of the Poṣadhavidhāna, as codified in 
its unique palmleaf witness, concludes with the 
recitation of Amoghapāśa’s mantra.137 The Poṣadha- 
vidhāna provides the earliest documentation for 
the widespread Nepalese custom of worshipping 
Amoghapāśa on the poṣadha day, which still con-
tinues in Newar Buddhism. 
133. Vajrācārya 1999: 14ff. (fig.[5], śrī amoghapāśa 
lokeśvara sahita dhaṃlyāhiti ).
134. Auror
a Graldi, personal communication, 2018. The 
‘life-size’ wooden Amoghapāśas constructed with eight 
arms (all examples are now damaged) include Smithsonian 
Institution F2000.5, Los Angeles Museum County of Art 
M.77.19.28, and MMoA 1982.247.
135. Gautamaśrī is named ( gotma śrībhadrapāda ) in a list 
of the Kriyāsamuccaya ’s teachers preserved in Sanskrit MS 
Kaiser Library 110, f. 339v 4. The same list was transmitted 
to Tibet and is conveyed (with embroidering and errors) 
in the Deb ther sngon po (Sinclair 2016b: 225).
136. The Poṣad
havidhāna  is transmitted in a unique MS 
at the Royal Asiatic Society (Cowell and Eggeling 1876: 
46, No. 70). It has been transcribed and edited in Sinclair 
2016b: 323–370 in work that is currently being prepared for 
publication.
137. The ritual of the Poṣadhavidhāna  conc ludes with 
a distinct step called the āryāmoghapāśavrata , involving 
the transmission of one of the bodhisattva’s dhāra ṇīs. This 
dhāra ṇī originates in the Amoghapāśakalparāja  (MS  f. 86v 1, 
ed. Sasaki, Itō and Yamamoto 2010: 192, cf. Sinclair 2016b: 
163): [ om̐] amoghaśīla mahāśuddhasattva bhara 
bhara sambhara sambhara padmavibhūṣitabhuja 
dhara dhara samantāvalokiteśvarāya  (Poṣadha-  
vidhāna  MS f. 6r 6–v 1, ed. Sinclair 2016b: 358).Whereas the first images of the bodhisattva 
produced in Nepal are aligned with the ‘outsid -
er’ (bahī) monastic tradition, as distinct from the 
royal monasteries that sheltered local monks,138 
the Siṅhasāri Amoghapāśas are definite products 
of royal patronage. The inscription on the base of 
the Padang Roco Amoghapāśa sets out an impe-
rial agenda. It records that the statue was trans -
ported from Java accompanied by courtiers at the 
behest of mahārājādhirāja Kṛtanagara. Both the 
icon (bharāla) and the king are referred to with the 
honorific pāduka. This object was purpose-built to 
be looked up to by the Malay people:
The virtue of this monument is fit for the joy-
ous salutations [of] all natives in Melayu coun-
try (saka praja di bhūmi malāyu)—Brahmins, 
Kṣatriyas, Vaiśyas, Śūdras, Āryas—especial-
ly the śrīmahārāja and śrī-Tribhuvana King 
Maulivarmadeva.139
A striking association is being forged here between 
the eight-armed Amoghapāśa and Melayu, ‘Malay’, 
country. The phrase praja di bhūmi calls to mind 
the present-day nativist terms pribumi or bumipu- 
tera. Its use in the context of the inscription implies 
that the eight-armed bodhisattva had a special 
relationship with the people of the Malay world, 
and ‘especially’ (pramukha) with their ruler. How 
the statue’s Javanese backers came to perceive 
such a relationship is not known, but at this point 
they had presumably occupied former Śrīvijayan 
strongholds where such images were enshrined. 
The official and internal Javanese view, as conveyed 
in Mpu Prapañca’s Deśavar ṇana, is that this very 
138. All sites associated with early Amoghapāśa images 
in Nep
al belong to monasteries of the bahī  class, namely, 
Thaṃ, Guitaḥ, and Pūco Bahī (Sinclair 2016b: 151). On the 
meaning of bahī as ‘outside’ (the cosmopolitan/metropol -
itan centre), see Sinclair 2016b: 49–50.
139. kunuṅ punyeni yogya di-anumodanāñjaleḥ saka 
praja di bhūmi malāyū, brāhma ṇaḥ kṣat riya vaiśya sūdra, 
āryyā māddhyāt, śrī mahārāja śrīmat tribhuvanarāja mauli -
varmmadeva pramukha (Krom 1917: 326). The literature 
on the inscription (e.g. Ferrand 1922: 123) gives varying 
translations. The interpretation of words such as punya , di, 
madhyāt (skipped to avoid forced wording in this transla -
tion) and pramukha would benefit from more information 
on the language of the inscription (classified as ‘Old Malay’ 
by Griffiths 2018: 282). 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   32 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 37] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back33
devamūrti140 was instrumental in the ultimate 
defeat of the Malay lands.141 Kṛtanagara began his 
pamalayu campaign in 1275 , over ten years before 
the installation of the statue, and Prapañca leaves 
no doubt that this conflict ended with Melayu’s 
submission.142 The Javanese king, in the view of his 
court, co-opted and absorbed the divine protec-
tor(s) of the Śrīvijayan–Melayu polity along with 
the polity itself. 
The Padang Roco statue formalized the annexa-
tion of Maulivarmadeva and his people at more than 
one level. Its inscription not only dictates Mauli -
varmadeva’s status as a vassal, a lesser mahārāja 
than mahārājādhirāja Kṛtanagara; it sets up the 
‘murtified’ Javanese king as a figurehead for the 
whole Malay people. The figure of Viṣṇuvardhana–
Amoghapāśa enshrines the sacrality of Indo-Java 
over and above that of Indo-Malaya. Tribhuvanarā -
ja Maulivarmadeva, insofar as he can be identified 
with Sang Sapurba Tribhuvanarāja in the Sejarah 
Melayu literature,143 is indeed a ‘Hindustani’ king. 
The Indic pedigree of Maulivarmadeva’s kingship 
is clearly being acknowledged in the Padang Roco 
inscription. His Javanese overlords place him at 
the apex of the four-caste hierarchy, which is rarely 
associated with the classical Malay social order.144 
140. In the understanding of Schlüter 2010, the term 
devamūrti  would refer to Kṛtanagara himself (‘Intense 
was going to be their fear because of His being a divine 
incarnation’).
141. nagāsyabhawa śāka  [1197 ] saṅ prabhū kumon dumona 
rikanaṅ tanah di malayū / ḷwĕs mara bhayanya saṅka ri 
khadewamūrttinira ṅūni kālahan ikā  (Deśavar ṇana 41.5 cd, 
ed. Pigeaud 1960: 31). See also trans. Robson 1995: 54.
142. Melay
u is described as bowing to Kṛtanagara’s feet 
in Deśavarṇana  42.2b (ed. Pigeaud 1960: 32). See also trans. 
Robson 1995: 55. Such frank assertions of dominance make 
it hard to see how ‘ the relationship between the two realms 
may have appeared (at least officially) friendly ’ (Reichle 
2007:  122).
143. Sinclair 2019a. Note, however, that the various 
Sejarah Melayu  recensions offer significantly differing ac -
counts of Sang Sapurba’s career. His status as raja melayu 
and bangsa hindustan is specified only in recension II (ed. 
Ahmat Adam 2016: 36 25, 39 15), as defined by Chambert-Loir 
2017: 169.
144. This attitude can be contrasted with the low con -
sciousness of four-caste norms in Java at the time. Fol -
lowing Hall 2000: 61ff., it seems that generic ‘clergy’ and 
‘royalty’ were more compelling social categories than brāh -The non-caste society of the Sumatrans is all but 
passed over in the inscription, with only the word 
ārya, perhaps, alluding to a Buddhist or ‘Indian’ 
segment of the population.145 The Padang Roco 
Amoghapāśa in this way presents itself as a totem 
of normative Hindu–Buddhist unity, embodying 
its Javanese creators’ worldview.
Whereas the Padang Roco Amoghapāśa was 
oriented towards the then centre of the ‘Malay’ 
world, the other Siṅhasāri Amoghapāśas are part 
of a still larger and more cosmopolitan project. 
The Candi Jago stone sculptures have their names 
engraved in a script classifiable as Proto-Benga -
li-cum-Proto-Maithili,146 which at the time was 
used in the northeast of the subcontinent, and 
is otherwise almost unknown in Indonesia. The 
bronze plaques of the Candi Jago Amoghapāśas 
are inscribed in similar yet again distinct and 
foreign types of script.147 The designers of Candi 
Jago were making ‘Indic’ icons, meaningful to the 
wider Sanskritic world. But to whom, exactly, the 
Jago icons were meant to speak is not yet known. 
The inscribed Amoghapāśas seem to anticipate 
an event of the kind narrated in the Sang Sapurba 
episode of the Sejarah Melayu, in which an Indian 
xenarch arrives in Sumatra and has his claim to 
rule accepted.148 The artisans of Candi Jago were 
themselves in close proximity to people from the 
subcontinent, as can be seen from the distinc -
maṇa and kṣatriya  in 13 th- and 14th-century Java. The 
question of why the Javanese displayed concern about the 
Malay social order will have to be explored elsewhere, but 
see in brief Sinclair 2019a: 7.
145. The word āryya  is not e asily construed with the 
brāhma ṇa or kṣ atriya mentioned in the same sentence 
(cf. n. 137 above) in the Padang Roco inscription. As such, 
these ārya s are at least potentially Buddhists, if not part 
of the āryasaṅgha . The Buddhist king Ādityavarman, who 
later ruled this area, identifies as āryavaṃśa  in his Jago 
inscription of 1343 (cf. Kozok and van Reijn 2010: 139). 
146. Sincl
air 2016b: 326, Table 3.
147. These remarks are made with reference to the fol -
lowing plaques: Berlin MIK II 233 (Moeller 1985: 23, pl. 8b); 
MMoA 2014.517; Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde, Leiden, 
RV-2630-1 (Bernet Kempers 1959, pl. 258 et al.); and two 
referred to by Speyer 1904a: 140, 1904b: 255. Identifications 
of the regional affiliations of the scripts used to engrave 
these plaques will require a separate study.
148. See, in b
rief, Sinclair 2019a.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   33 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 38] ---
Iain Sinclair34
tive writing engraved on the backs of the votive 
plaques. 
The powerful cosmopolitan aura exuded by the 
inscribed Siṅhasāri Amoghapāśas persisted well 
beyond the time and place of their production. Two 
generations after the Padang Roco Amoghapāśa 
was set up, in 1347 , the statue was again at the 
centre of attention in Melayu country. It was 
moved from its initial location, reconsecrated and 
re-inscribed in Sanskrit by Maulivarmadeva’s 
grandson, Ādityavarman (c. 1293–1375 ).149 This 
extraordinary act was an ‘appropriation’150 of the 
object that had once enshrined the subordinate 
status of Ādityavarman’s forebear and his people. 
Ādityavarman’s repurposing of the Padang Roco 
Amoghapāśa marked the assumption of sover -
eignty over his grandfather’s domain, the Suma -
tran highlands, as reflected in his new and lasting 
use of the title mahārājādhirāja .151 This and other 
Sanskrit epigraphs of Ādityavarman give the col -
lective impression of reviving the zeitgeist of the 
late 13th century,152 during which the Indic and 
Malayo-Javanese poles of Hindu-Buddhist civili -
zation enjoyed a final round of contact. With Ād-
ityavarman’s added epigraph, it becomes apparent 
that the worship of the eight-armed Amoghapāśa 
spans almost the entire history of Malay Buddhism, 
from its Śrīvijayan beginnings to its endgame in the 
14th-century enclaves ruled by Maulivarmadeva’s 
descendants.153 Candi Jago is, incidentally, still a 
low-key site of worship, many centuries after the 
149. The text of Chatterjee and Chakravarti 1933: 81–82 
is followed here. On the relation of Ādityavarman’s regnal 
title maulima ṇivarma devamahārājādhirāja  (Chatterjee 
and Chakravarti ibid.) to Maulivarmadeva / Sang Sapurba, 
see in brief Sinclair 2019a.
150. Reichle
 2007:  127 uses the term ‘ appropriation ’ in 
this context.
151. Sincl
air 2019a.
152. Hendrik Kern’s assessment of the inscription as ‘ not 
much more than gibberish ’ (trans. Kozok and van Reijn 
2010:  144ff .) could hardly be expected to shed much light 
on Ādityavarman’s project. For some references to previ -
ous work on Ādityavarman’s epigraphic corpus, see Sri 
Ambarwati Kusumadewi 2012.
153. We might wonder, along with Kwa 2010, whether an 
eight-armed Amoghapāśa had become a tutelary deity of 
Maulivarmadeva’s line, and came to be installed in Sin -
gapura by Sang Sapurba’s son Sang Nila Utama.collapse of the religious and dynastic institutions 
associated with it.154
It can further be seen that the Viṣṇuvardha -
na-Amoghapāśa images followed a trail blazed 
by the Jayabuddhamahānātha cult of the Khmer 
Empire. The similarities between the Khmer and 
Javanese power-projection projects are remark-
able, starting with the choice of the eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa as the sovereign’s avatar. Both Jaya-
buddhamahānātha and the murtified Viṣṇuvardha -
na were realized as portrait statues, which were dis -
tributed in the form of miniature bronzes as well as 
stone sculpture. A possible pathway for the spread 
of the devamūrti cult is the close contact between 
the Malay and Khmer worlds that existed during 
the reign of this or another Maulivarmadeva.155 It 
has been ventured that the stocky portrait statues 
of Kṛtanagara, the Joko Dolog and its replicas, were 
inspired by the Khmer Jayabuddhamahānātha 
statues (Reichle 2007: 25 ).
One other stone sculpture from the Archipelago 
displaying eight arms has proven to be difficult 
to fit into a chronology. This sculpture is cur -
rently housed in the Pura Puseh of Kutri, Buruan 
village, Bali.156 It displays definite stylistic affinities 
with the Candi Jago images, such as the jewelled 
waistband. It displays wafting scarves that look 
like the tall lily pad stalks of Siṅhasāri sculpture. 
However, the Kutri figure, unlike the Candi Jago 
Amoghapāśa, carries a hook and conch. These 
objects are common in the Khmer iconography of 
the bodhisattva, as seen in the bronzes of Jayabud-
dhamahānātha, but the conch is most appropriate 
for the eight-armed Viṣṇu. The iconography may 
154. Waterways near Candi Jago are reportedly still 
treated as tirtha by the local Tengger community (see e.g. 
‘Begini Prosesi Ruwatan di Desa Candi Jago Tumpang’, 
Malang Today , 5 November 2016). 
155. De Cas
paris (1967: 34–35) argued for the identifica -
tion of Maulivarmadeva with the Maulibhūṣaṇavarma -
deva who commissioned the so-called Buddha of Grahi 
(on which see e.g. Krairiksh 2012: 352–353, pl. 2.376). Al -
though de Casparis’ identification is historically neat, it 
is paleographically improbable that the digits 1 1 0 0 6 [?] 
inscribed on the Buddha of Grahi’s pedestal can yield a 
date falling within the expected dates of Maulivarmadeva’s 
reign. Maulibhūṣaṇavarmadeva must then be regarded as 
a different, earlier king.
156. See e.g
. Reichle 2007: 111.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   34 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 39] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back35
then have some conceptual connection with Viṣṇu -
vardhana. As Bali is known to have been conquered 
by Siṅhasāri before Melayu, the Kutri statue may 
represent a kind of precursor to or prototype of 
the Siṅhasāri Amoghapāśas. As the Kutri statue 
has only been photographed in a damaged state, 
without vital identifying features such as the crown, 
it cannot be conclusively identified as Amoghapāśa 
and is discussed no further here. 
the persistent significations of the 
eight-armed amoghapāśa
Throughout the transmigration of the eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa, the question arises: what distinctive task is performed by the bodhisattva with eight 
arms? Why could it not be performed by the 
forms with four arms, six arms, ten arms and so 
on? Why worship one instead of another? Prob -
lems of meaning and interpretation, which were 
peripheral in charting the bodhisattva’s lightly 
documented earlier career, come to the fore again 
in appraising Amoghapāśa’s final incarnation. 
How much was retained from the early religios -
ity surrounding Avalokiteśvara, which promoted 
the hope of rescue from the Eight Great Fears?157 
Avalokiteśvara images that were thought to have 
offered protection from drowning were prominent 
in port cities and maritime regions, as has been 
shown by Bopearachchi (2014, 2017 ). Y et if safe 
seafaring was the bodhisattva’s original impetus, it 
is lost in the technical literature on Amoghapāśa 
produced in the Kathmandu Valley.
At least three visualization traditions of the 
eight-armed Amoghapāśa have been transmit -
ted in Sanskrit. They are not known to have been 
translated into Tibetan and are distinct from 
Śākyaśrī’s and Vibhūticandra’s sādhanas.158 They 
occur in anonymous handbooks for visualizing 
Amoghapāśa witnessed in a large number of man-
uscripts, none older than the 16 th century. Most 
are in poor textual condition and have remained 
unstudied. They describe the visage of the eight-
armed Amoghapāśa without substantial differences 
in posture, complexion, or the objects held in the 
hands. As such, they reflect a single late phase in the 
development of the type, rather than a protracted 
inflow that covers all of the variation seen across 
other parts of Asia. Altogether they fit the picture 
gleaned from the art-historical corpus: the bo-
dhisattva first comes into view on the subcontinent 
relatively suddenly, in Nepal, and in connection 
with an exodus of Buddhist specialists from India.
One visualization of the eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa circulating in Nepal provides an 
157. Bautze-Picron 2004: 241; Acri 2019: 54, n. 6.
158. Three Sanskritic traditions of visualization are 
represented in the following texts: (1) an Amoghapāśapū -
jāvidhi  partly transcribed by Pal (1966: 234); (2) an 
Amoghapāśapūjā  conveyed in MS NGMPP H 314/10; (3) the 
Amoghapāśama ṇḍalarā jāgrī nāma samādhi transcribed by 
Badrīratna Vajrācārya (2005:[2]–[7]) and reedited in this 
chapter.Fig. 2.11: Eight-armed deity, usually identified as 
Amoghapāśa, holding a hook in the upper right hand 
and a conch in the upper left hand. Stone, c. 10th–13th 
century. Pura Puseh, Kutri, Buruan village, Gianyar, 
Bali. (Photograph by Andrea Acri, 30 December 2018)
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   35 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 40] ---
Iain Sinclair36
especially clear picture of the late conception of 
the bodhisattva. This ma ṇḍalarājāgrī samādhi  
procedure forms part of an elaborate ritual of 
the ‘eighth-day vow’, the aṣṭamīvrata. In Newar 
Buddhism, the aṣṭamīvrata has become synony-
mous with the fasting day, the poṣadha, which is 
practised in a monastic or semi-monastic setting. 
Its practitioners are often people who are under-
going serious distress and hope for the bodhisat-
tva’s intervention.159 The samādhi text appended 
to this chapter sets out a complete visualization 
of the bodhisattva’s ma ṇḍala as well as his physi-
cal appearance and retinue. It was first published
 
by Badrīratna Vajrācārya (2005 ) without notes 
or references to sources and has received little 
further attention. It is re-edited here (Appendix 
2.2) using the readings of three manuscripts and 
various textual parallels. 
A text-critical appraisal of this ma ṇḍalarā -
jāgrī samādhi of Amoghapāśa reveals extensive 
borrowing from a mature Sanskrit corpus, which 
points to it having been composed after the early 
13th century. The universe-generating meditation 
is lifted from a sādhana of the Harihariharivāha-  
nodbhavalokeśvara. The emanation of the bodhisat-  
tva and the description of his retinue is cribbed 
from the Khasarpaṇasādhana by Padmākaramati. 
The passage on ma ṇḍala architecture is common 
boilerplate in the praxis literature of the Guhya-  
samājatantra going back to Nāgabuddhi.160 All 
of these works were circulating in Nepal before 
the mid-13 th century. The only distinctive part 
of the visualization is the couple of sentences on 
the objects held by the eight-armed Amoghapāśa. 
The text can altogether be regarded as a typical 
‘post-Indian’ Buddhist work that is driven by a 
practical and unpretentious need to document a 
religious inheritance. Its vision of Amoghapāśa 
unfolds as follows:
Next is the concentrated state called Maṇḍalarā-
jāgrī. 
Now, having cultivated the four Brahmic 
states—friendliness, compassion, delight, equa-
nimity—[repeat]:
159. Sinclair 2016b: 115.
160. See App
endix 2.2, notes a–d.om̐ , all dharmas are inherently pure, i am 
inherently pure. i have the inherent na-
ture of the vajra of knowledge of emp-
tiness.
Then, emanated by means of the syllable yam ̐ , 
is a bow-shaped wind ma ṇḍala marked with a 
blue flag; on top of it, arising from a ra[m ̐ ]
, a 
red fire ma ṇḍala, triangular, marked with a red 
ra glyph; above that, transformed from the syl-
lable vam ̐ , a water 
maṇḍala, round, clear in col-
our, marked with a white bell; above that, aris-
ing 
from the syllable lam̐ , an earthen maṇḍala, 
four-sided, yellow, blazoned with yellow three-
pronged vajras in the four corners; above that, 
emanated from the syllable sum ̐ , Sumeru, made 
of four jewels, boasting eight pe
aks underneath.
  The residence, the crystalline cavern of 
blessed Potalaka mountain, is a pagoda adorned 
[with] four doors [and] four tympana, having 
sun-and-moon emblems at all four corners of 
the points of contact between the doorway and the pedim
ents (niryūha ) and decorated with 
pearl and half-pearl [strings], enclosed by four 
cords, beautified by banners and streamers, 
girded by piping and parapets, the vase-capi-
tal columns studded with vajra gems. Also, the 
sides have a great vajra parapet festooned with 
a net of tinklebells. [The ma ṇḍala] is adorned 
with eight flagstaffs, is well decorated with yak-
tail fans; the sun outside is in the correct place.
1. In the internal ma ṇḍala transformed from 
the syllable paṃ, 
upon a lotus with all-spread-
ing petals, is the full moon ma ṇḍala generated 
from the syllable am ̐ . Having visualized upon 
it the syllable 
hrīḥ, extremely bright, [its] con-
centration of shimmering rays pervading the 
sky, he should look upon the nucleus of his syl-
lable changed into an outspread lotus adorned 
with a stalk. Then he should imagine all of that 
transformed into the persona of the Bhaga-
vat. His body the dazzling white of a crore of 
snow-glints, he has a smiling face, about twice 
eight years [old], looking compassionate and 
affectionate, attended by passionate sentiment, 
most peaceful, complete with all [auspicious] marks, bereft of all non-[auspicious] marks, 
single-faced, wearing ascetic garb; having a 
crown of piled-up locks, Amitābha is fashioned 
in the crest; he is adorned with divine orna -
ments of gold, ruby, pearl, lapis and jewels of all 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   36 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 41] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back37
kinds. He is eight-armed,161 on the right [side] 
bestowing a stream of ambrosia with the first 
hand, holding a rosary with the second hand, 
holding a noose with the third hand, hold-
ing the jewel of unfear with the fourth hand; 
on the left, holding a thousand-petalled lotus 
with stalk with the first hand, with the second 
hand satiating the needlemouthed [preta] be-
low him tasting the to-and-fro of the stream 
of downpouring nectar, holding a book of the 
Prajñā with the third hand, holding a water-
pot with the fourth hand—in this way should 
he conceive the persona of Infallible Noose 
(Amoghapāśa), the glorious Lokeśvara. He 
should think that the persona of Vajradharma, 
red in colour, seated on a peacock, is emanated 
from a hrīm ̐  syllable on the Bhagavat’s crest.
2. On his outside, in front of the Bhagavat, is 
Amoghāṅkuśa, red in colour, a hook held in his 
right hand, holding a noose in his left.
3. On the Bhagavat’s right is Tārā, dark 
[green], in the left hand grasping with the stalk 
a blue waterlily being opened up with the right 
hand. [She is] replete with a variety of jewelry, 
bearing breasts of freshest youth.
4. And in the southeast is prince Sudha-
na, cupping [his hands] in salutation; a book 
tucked under his left arm, he has the lustrous 
sheen of gold, maintaining the appearance of a 
prince laden with all ornaments.
5. On the left is Bhṛkuṭī, four-armed, of gold -
e
n aura, her locks fanned out, holding in hand 
a triple staff and waterpot on the right, the arms on the left waving in greeting and holding a seed rosary. [She is] three-eyed.
6.
 In the northeast is Hayagrīva, red in colour, 
squa
t and potbellied, having flamelike orange 
hair, an anaconda for a sacred thread, tawny 
facial hair lined around the circle of his mouth, 
three round red eyes, frown-furrowed brows, 
and a tiger-pelt garment. Armed with a club in 
his right hand, he waves in greeting. […]
This is the mature form of the eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa and his four followers, as seen in 
161. A similar description is translated by Sakuma  
2015: 132.the Kathmandu Valley, the Candi Jago pantheon 
and, with slight differences including the omis -
sion of the optional retinue figures, the Śrīvijayan 
artistic corpus. One distinctive feature of this vis-
ualization text is the addition of the bodhisattva 
Amoghāṅkuśa, which may reflect Nepalese in -
terests. Amoghāṅkuśa is identifiable with the red 
Trailokyavaśaṃkara form of Avalokiteśvara, who 
in turn had been identified with Nepal’s ‘nation -
al deity’ Buṅgadyaḥ.162 However, the addition of 
Amoghāṅkuśa in this visualization tradition had 
little impact on the artistic corpus,163 and is visible 
in just one Amoghapāśamaṇḍala painting conse-
crated (possibly in Thamel) in 1516 .164 
The maṇḍalarājāgrī samādhi text goes on to 
detail the rest of Amoghapāśa’s ma ṇḍala, which 
contains the eight great bodhisattvas (7–14 ), the 
four offering goddesses (15–18 ) and the four bo-
dhisattvas of attraction (19–22 ), generally the 
common property of Vajradhātu-system ma ṇḍalas. 
The outer part is occupied by the eight gods of the 
directions at the periphery (23–30 ). This ma ṇḍala—
together with other Amoghapāśamaṇḍalas circu -
lating in Nepal165 that have no particular scriptural 
source166—are both formulaic and arbitrary in a 
way that indicates a late, isolated context, uncon-
cerned with high punditry. They provide no further 
leads on the early throughline of the eight-armed 
form.
The eight-armed Amoghapāśa has been wor-
shipped as the central figure of the poṣadha ritual 
since its Nepalese debut. Of course, there was a 
long-standing link between the fasting day and the 
cult of Amoghapāśa going back to the Hṛdaya.167 
However, other forms of Avalokiteśvara had been 
162. Sakuma 2006.
163. One example is Amoghāṅkuśa’s presence in the 
aṣṭamīvrata (poṣadha ) ritual conveyed in MS Shakya 2010 
No. 18, exposure 36. Here Amoghāṅkuśa is to be invoked 
with his characteristic gesture ( abhinaya ) immediately 
after the eight-armed Avalokiteśvara. 
164. The par
tly legible dedication of HAR 58964 could 
be read … vaṃtha bahāra  or …- vaṃ tha bahāra , i.e. Thaṃ 
Bahī. 
165. Sakum
a 2017.
166. Tanak
a 2019: 55.
167. The poṣadha is t he main occasion for reciting the 
Hṛdaya (cf. ed. Meisezahl 1962: 327 5). 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   37 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 42] ---
Iain Sinclair38
worshipped on poṣadha days before the eight-
armed form became the main object of worship 
in Nepal.168 The eight-armed form was introduced 
at a time when the observance of the poṣadha had 
acquired another purpose: it had become a pre -
requisite for initiation into the Hevajratantra. 
This Tantra asked prospective initiates to observe 
the poṣadha before taking up the Hevajra tantric 
system.169 Previously poṣadha celebrations had 
been monastic affairs that upheld conservative 
Buddhist norms, but by the 13 th century they were 
increasingly conceived as introductions to tantric 
Buddhism. This shift is evident in the early hand-
books for the tantric poṣadha, such as the afore -
mentioned Kriyāsamuccaya and Poṣadhavidhāna; 
its many and varied aspects are traced elsewhere.170 
The eight-armed Amoghapāśa was therefore  
positioned in Nepal at a potential point of entry 
to tantric praxis, though not overtly and not in a 
manner that diminished the traditional integrity 
of poṣadha observances.
Associations between monastic life, Hevajra 
praxis and the worship of the eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa can be traced back to Southeast Asia. 
It is well known that Atiśa was a Hevajra yogin171 
before being ordained and embarking on his voyage 
to the Malay Archipelago. In his later career Atiśa 
famously insisted on the priority of monastic vows. 
He called for regular performance of the poṣadha 
at Thaṃ Bahī, and set up a Hevajra shrine there at 
its founding.172 The ritual outlined in the Poṣadha- 
vidhāna, which codifies Thaṃ Bahī’s praxis tradi-
168. The eight-armed form displaced older forms of Ava-
lokiteśvara that had been worshipped in Nepal, especially 
Ekādaśamukha (Sinclair 2016b: 154–159) and the twelve-
armed form ( ibid.: 159–162), which might have been called 
Avalokitanātha (Sinclair 2017: xii).
169. The directive poṣadhaṃ dīyate prathamam ( He-
vajratantra II.8.9a, ed. Tripathi and Negi 2006: 183) and 
its impact on Buddhist tantrism in Nepal is discussed in 
Sinclair 2016b: 85ff.
170. The affili
ation of the Poṣadhavidhāna  to Haivajrika 
tantrism is partly but strongly indicated by the verse be -
ginning ātmatattvasya prasādakira ṇaiḥ … (MS f
. 2r 8–v 1), 
is discussed in Sinclair 2016b: 330, 360–361. Its ritual is 
similar to that of the Kriyāsamuccaya , which is Haivajrika 
in orientation.
171. Vettu
rini 2007 I: 52.
172. Sincl
air 2016b: 318–319.tion, reveals definite commonalities with Atiśa’s 
religiosity.173 In the Khmer Empire,174 the eight-
armed Amoghapāśa had been appearing alongside 
Hevajra in institutional settings long before the 
13th century. The joint veneration of Amoghapāśa 
and Hevajra practised in Ādityavarman’s kingdom 
has definite precedent on the subcontinent and 
elsewhere in the region.
The Amoghapāśa with eight arms is an apt 
symbol for the poṣadha, given that it entails an ‘oc-
topartite fast’ (aṣṭāṅgapoṣadha) of eight overnight 
vows held on the eighth day of the lunar month 
(aṣṭamīvrata). The worship of Amoghapāśa is 
further said to bestow eight rights (aṣṭau dharmān) 
to a dignified death.175 The relation between these 
eightfold sets and Amoghapāśa was already es -
tablished in the Hṛdaya, which remained in wide 
circulation in Nepal. Yet no known interpretive 
tradition identifies the eight arms of the bodhisat-
tva with the eightfold aspects of the fasting day.176 
The old meaning of the expression aṣṭāṅga, as used 
in connection with the poṣadha, was lost in Nepal 
soon after the arrival of the eight-armed form.177 To 
this day there is no authoritative native interpreta-tion of the significance of the eight arms in Nepal. 
The eightfold correspondences linked to the eight 
poṣadha vows seem to have had nothing to do with 
the form of the eight-armed Amoghapāśa. 
Alternatively, the uptake of the eight-armed 
bodhisattva in the Sanskritic world can be con-
trasted with the prevalence of non-Buddhist 
eight-armed deities. The attraction of potential 
converts to Buddhism is a well-known aim of 
173. On the bodhicittotpādana  vers es originally from the 
Mañjuśrībuddhakṣetragu ṇālaṃkār avyūha , which were 
not widely circulated but which both Atiśa and the Poṣa-  
dhavidhāna  commend for use (MS f. 5r 7–v 5), see Sinclair 
2016b: 143–144, 366. 
174. Sharrock 2013: 50 likewise speaks of the ‘Lokeśvariza -
tion’ of Khmer Hevajra statues.
175. Hṛdaya , ed. Me isezahl 1962: 318 5–6. See also Reis-Hab -
ito 1999: 43 and Sonali Dhingra’s chapter in the second 
volume of the present edited collection (Dhingra 2022).
176. Sincla
ir 2016b: 151.
177. On the a
ṣṭāṅga of the poṣadha interpreted as pros -
trating with the eight limbs of the body ( aṣṭāṅgapra ṇāma ) 
in Nepalese avadānamālā  literature, see Sinclair 2016b:  
152, n. 94.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   38 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 43] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back39
poṣadha celebrations.178 Nepalese depictions of 
the bodhisattva, for instance, are often confused 
with Lakṣmīnārāyaṇa, who also has eight arms, 
a standing posture and a light complexion, and 
who began to be depicted widely in Nepal from 
the 13th century onwards.179 This hermaphroditic 
Vaiṣṇava deity had a certain prominence in the 
Newar visual culture of the period. He/She has 
been portrayed in quasi-Buddhist ma ṇḍala com-
positions and is often confused with Amoghapāśa. 
One visualization tradition asserts differentia -
tion by having Lakṣmīnārāyaṇa trampled on by 
Vajrahūm ̐kāra.180 In spite of these strong visual 
commonalities, it is difficult to see how the eight-
armed Avalokiteśvara could have been promoted 
with the hope of being accepted accidentally by 
devotees enculturated in Hinduism. 
The most compelling explanatory rubric for the 
eight-armed iconography remains the discourse of 
the Eight Great Fears. Sanskrit sources on the Fears 
are propagated in the Nepalese corpus and were 
available to devotees throughout the bodhisattva’s 
Nepalese career. The power of Avalokiteśvara to 
avert drowning is an old trait of the bodhisattva, 
as summed up in an oft-quoted verse of the Sad-
dharmapu ṇḍarīka:
He might fall into the vault of the ocean—
abode of serpents, sea-monsters, antigods and 
spirits; after remembering Avalokiteśvara, he 
never sinks into the king of waters.181
Similarly, the reciter of the Hṛdaya prays to be 
saved from ten fears, including the Fear of Water 
178. This was argued at length in Tuladhar-Douglas 2006. 
See also Sinclair 2016b: 157ff.
179. Sincl
air 2016b: 152–153.
180. lakṣm
īnārāya ṇam ākrān
taṃ, vajrahūm ̐kāraṃ bhā-
vayet (Mañjuvajramukhākhyāna , ed. Tanaka 2018: 54 9, 
regularized text). The mukhākhyāna genre appears to 
be unknown outside Nepal (Sinclair 2016b: 180, n. 214). 
Lakṣmīnārāyaṇa is also mentioned in the Nepalese Yo -
gasiddhāntabuddhasiddhitantra .
181. saci sāgaradurgi pātayen nāgamakarasurabhūtaālaye 
| smarato avalokiteśvaraṃ jalarāje na kadāci sīdati ( Sad-
dharmapu ṇḍarīka  24 .6, ed. Dutt 1953: 295 9–10), cited also 
by Bopearachchi 2014: 164 (with another, similar passage 
from the same chapter) and Acri 2019: 58, n. 11.(udaka).182 The Kalparāja refers to the Eight 
Great Fears as a set (MS f. 24a 2). It is clear that 
the Malayo-Javanese world, as well, looked upon 
Avalokiteśvara as a saviour from the Fears. The 
only Sanskrit work related to Avalokiteśvara that 
has survived in the region, the Aṣṭamahābhaya 
Kliṅ transmitted in Bali,183 is nominally concerned 
with the Eight Great Fears. It in fact gives mantras 
to quell ten fears, as well as to avert harm from 
poisons and other dangers. While textual par -
allels to the Aṣṭamahābhaya Kliṅ have not yet 
been located in the wider Sanskritic tradition,184 
its spells are broadly similar to those given in the 
literature on Amoghapāśa. It would be natural in 
this context for the noose held by Amoghapāśa 
to be recognized intuitively as a lifeline for sailors 
in peril.185 
The eight-armed form therefore embodies in an 
almost self-evident manner the capacity for rescue 
from diverse dangers, in which the fear of mari-
time disaster is foremost. It is the natural form for 
Avalokiteśvara to take on in the Malay Archipelago, 
where Buddhism and sea journeys had longstand-
ing linkages.186 While the earlier association with 
the protection of seafarers is lost in the late sādhana 
literature, it is still visible in the visual culture 
accompanying the bodhisattva in Nepal. Several 
Nepalese paintings of Amoghapāśamaṇḍalas—for 
instance Yale University Art Gallery 1988.76.14 —
include vignettes of the Great Fears. Among these 
vignettes are horrific portrayals of drowning men 
being devoured by swarms of marine life. These 
are remarkable not only for their variety but for 
the fact that they were painted in landlocked Nepal. 
182. vadha-bandhana-tā ḍana-tarj ana-rāja-taskara-ag-
ny-udaka-viṣa-śastra-parimocaka (Hṛdaya , after ed. Mei -
sezahl 1962: 323 5–6).
183. Goudri
aan and Hooykaas 1971: 309–312, No. 504.
184. Sylvain Lévi’s claim (quoted in Goudriaan and 
Hooykaas 1971: 310) that ‘any Buddhist pandit [in Nepal] 
can recite’ the Aṣṭamahābhaya Kliṅ  has not been corrob -
orated by the discovery of a substantially similar text in 
the Nepalese corpus.
185. This observation was ventured by Lokesh Chandra to 
Mr Kwa Chong Guan (personal communication, September 
2018), who has long been pondering the significance of 
Amoghapāśa in the region (cf. Kwa 1967–1968).
186. Acri 2
019.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   39 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 44] ---
Iain Sinclair40
Fig. 2.12: Eight-armed Amoghapāśamaṇḍala surrounded by Buddhas, vignettes of the Fears and 
donor portraits. Second row from left: Buddha; Fears of Lightning, Snake, Fetters, Rapacious 
Beast, Execution, Water; Avalokiteśvara. Painting on cloth, Nepal, c. 15th century. Y ale University 
Art Gallery 1988.76.14 (HAR 58867). (Public Domain)
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   40 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 45] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back41
Fig. 2.13: Vignettes of the Fear of Water in Eight-armed Amoghapāśamaṇḍalas, depicting drowning men devoured 
by marine life. Hand drawings based on paintings on cloth, 14th–15th centuries, Nepal. Left: two vignettes from 
V&A 1S58-1977 (after MacDonald and Vergati Stahl 1979: 128 pl. V). Centre: Y ale University Art Gallery 1988.76.14 
(Figure 12), detail. Upper right: HAR 77041, detail. Lower right: HAR 18346, detail.
Fig. 2.14: The Fear of Water, represented by a drowning man being devoured by marine life and 
surrounded by serpents. Wood carving with original pigments and contemporary overpainting,  
Ta Bāhāḥ, Lalitpur, Nepal. (Photograph by Iain Sinclair, 21 February 2010)
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   41 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 46] ---
Iain Sinclair42
In the Kathmandu Valley, then, the eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa preserves informal but tangible re -
minders of its past life as a seafaring deity.187 
conclusions
The first diffusion of the eight-armed Amoghapāśa 
has been traced here to the Malay Archipela -
go. It spanned the early 7 th to the early 11 th 
centuries, lasting as long as Śrīvijaya itself.  
This initial spread built on an old culture of de -
votion to Avalokiteśvara as a saviour of seafarers 
while also drawing on a cultus of Amoghapāśa that 
had begun making its way across Asia. Soon after 
its debut in the Archipelago, the eight-armed form 
began spreading to China, bearing only indirect 
traces of its maritime origins. It persisted for some 
centuries, without discernible scriptural support, 
on the fringes of East Asia. Towards the end of the 
first millennium, the eight-armed form branched 
into the Khmer Empire, most likely through con-
tacts with the Malay world. The Khmers repur -
posed the form to embody the religiosity of the 
Kāra ṇḍavyūha. The bodhisattva’s penultimate it-
eration, which remains a living part of what is now 
called Newar Buddhism, debuted at the beginning 
of the 13 th century. It is not yet known how the 
bodhisattva’s cult first reached South Asia, but the 
major upheavals then occurring in transregional 
Buddhist networks may have been involved. It was 
this transmission that forked back to the Malay 
Archipelago, causing Amoghapāśa to be again 
venerated, under very different circumstances, as 
the totem of the rulers of the Malays. The worship 
of the eight-armed Amoghapāśa spread in this 
way from Melayu to Thamel and back. During 
each leap into a new environment, the bodhisat-
tva lost much of its established identity but kept 
some of its earlier momentum; it transmigrated, 
so to speak. 
Amoghapāśa’s eight arms are intuitively asso -
ciated in Mahāyāna contexts with the wish to be 
rescued from eight great fears, especially the fear of 
drowning. This association, having been ingrained 
187. Ashar Murdihastomo (2019) identifies Southeast 
Asian ‘patron deities of seafaring ’, partly with reference to 
Nepalese sources, in addition to Avalokiteśvara and Tārā, 
who are the focus of Bopearachchi 2014.into the non-tantric cult of Avalokiteśvara in 
Western India, persisted over a long period and dis -
tance in the visual culture of Indo-Nepalese tantric 
Buddhism. Whereas the worship of Amoghapāśa 
offered personal salvation for Newars observing 
the fasting ritual, the notion of rescuing people in 
distress was readily extended to the defensive pro-
tection of a territory or a polity. The eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa manifested in this capacity in East 
Asia, the Khmer Empire and the Malayo-Javanese 
world up to the 14 th century. Another role that 
recurs throughout the bodhisattva’s transmigra-
tions—again, without any known, explicit textual 
justification—is that of an exoteric precursor to the 
esoteric praxis of Hevajra. 
Ultimately, the standing eight-armed Amo-
ghapāśa, an enduring and well-travelled figure 
in the Sanskritic world, never occupied a place in 
‘Indian’ Buddhism. Likewise, many vital aspects of 
the bodhisattva’s cultus are invisible in, and un -
knowable from, the Indo-Tibetan praxis literature. 
Much of what is recorded in the sādhanas of the 
bodhisattva penned by celebrated pundits such as 
Śākyaśrībhadra and Vibhūticandra, and for that 
matter in the handbooks of the anonymous Nep-
alese codifiers who succeeded them, is no more 
than surface detail. The fact that the eight-armed 
Amoghapāśa was worshipped so widely and for so 
long as an ‘undocumented’ figure underlines the 
limitations of Sanskritist, Indologist and textualist 
paradigms for meaningfully conveying the reali -
ties of Himalayan and Southeast Asian religious 
environments. Classical textual sources, however 
important they may be, are clarified primarily in 
the light shed by other vital inheritances of the past, 
such as artistic corpora, informal culture and living 
praxis traditions.
Abbreviations
CC BY 2.0: Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 
Generic license. URL: https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/2.0/.
CC BY-NC-SA 2.0: CC BY-NC-SA 2.0. URL: https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.0/.
CC BY-SA 4.0: Creative Commons Attribution-Sha -
reAlike 4.0 International license. URL: https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.
en.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   42 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 47] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back43
D: Ui, Hakuju, Munetada Suzuki, and Enshō 
Kanakura. 1934. A Complete Catalogue of the 
Tibetan Buddhist Canons (Bkaḥ-ḥgyur and 
Bstan-ḥgyur). Sendai: Tōhoku Imperial Uni -
versity.
Dpe bsdur ma: Zhongguo Zang xue yan jiu zhong 
xin. 1995–2007. Bstan-’gyur. Beijing: Krung-go’ i 
Bod rig pa dpe skrun khang.
HAR: Himalayan Art Resources. URL: https://www.
himalayanart.org. 
ISEAS: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Sin -
gapore.
Q: Suzuki, Daisetz T. (ed.). 1962. The Tibetan Tri- 
pitaka: Peking Edition kept in the Library of 
the Otani University, Kyoto. Catalogue & Index. 
Tokyo: Suzuki Research Foundation.
T: The SAT Daizōkyō Text Database (SAT 大正
新脩大藏經テキストデータベース ). URL: 
http://21dzk.l.u-tokyo.ac.jp/SAT/satdb2015.php.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2017. ‘“Local” vs. “Cosmopolitan” in 
the Study of Premodern Southeast Asia’, 수완나
부미 (SUVANNABHUMI): Multi-disciplinary 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 9: 7–52. URL: 
https://www.earticle.net/Article/A306798.
. 2018. ‘The Place of Nusantara in the 
Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis’, TRaNS: Trans 
-Regional and -National Studies of Southeast Asia 
6/2: 139–166. http://doi.org/10.1017/trn.2018.5.
. 2019. ‘Navigating the “Southern Seas”, 
Miraculously: Avoidance of Shipwreck in 
Buddhist Narratives of Maritime Crossings’, in 
Marina Berthet, Fernando Rosa, and Shaun 
Viljoen (eds.), Moving Spaces: Creolisation and 
Mobility in Africa, the Atlantic and Indian 
Ocean, pp. 50–77. Leiden: Brill. http://doi.
org/10.1163/9789004410992_004.
Adiceam, Marguerite E. 1966. ‘Les images de 
Śiva dans l’Inde du Sud [V. Harihara]’, Arts 
Asiatiques 13: 83–98. http://doi.org/10.3406/
arasi.1966.948.
Ahmat Adam (ed.). 2016. Sulalat u’s-Salatin. Kuala 
Lumpur: Yayasan Karyawan.
Ashar Murdihastomo. 2019. ‘Identifikasi dewa-dewi 
agama Hindu-Budha sebagai dewa pelindung 
pelayaran (Identification of Hindu-Buddhist 
Gods and Goddesses as Patron Deities of Sea-faring)’, Naditira Widya 13/2: 87–104. http://doi.
org/10.24832/nw.v13i2.397.
Bambang Budi Utomo. 2013. ‘Arca-Arca Berlang-
gam Śailendra Di Luar Tanah Jawa’, Amerta: 
Jurnal Penelitian dan Pengembangan Arkeologi  
31/1: 1–80. http://doi.org/ 10.24832/amt.v31i1.148.
. 2016. Pengaruh Kebudayaan INDIA dalam 
Bentuk ARCA di Sumatra. Jakarta: Yayasan 
Pustaka Obor Indonesia.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 2004. ‘The Universal 
Compassionate Bodhisattva: Miscellaneous 
Aspects of Avalokitasvara/Avalokiteśvara 
in India’, Silk Road Art and Archaeology 10: 
225–290.
. 2019. ‘A Short Notice on a Recently Dis -
covered Lintel in Lakhisarai’, Journal of Bengal 
Art 24: 29–38.
Béguin, Gilles. 2009. Buddhist Art: An Historical 
and Cultural Journey. Bangkok: River Books.
Bendall, Cecil. 1883. Catalogue of the Buddhist 
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Library, 
Cambridge, with Introductory Notices and Illus. 
of the Palaeography and Chronology of Nepal 
and Bengal. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Bernet Kempers, A.J. 1959. Ancient Indonesian Art. 
Amsterdam: van der Peet.
Bhattacharya, Buddhadev. 2016. Kāra ṇḍavyūha 
sūtra: A Bi-lingual Critical Edition for the First 
Time from Sanskrit-Tibetan Manuscripts with 
an Introduction. New Delhi: Kaveri Books. 
Bhattacharya, Gouriswar. 2001. ‘Pretasantarpi -
ta-Lokeśvara’, Journal of Bengal Art 6: 21–44.
Bhattacharya, Benoytosh (ed.). 1925–1928. Sādha-
namālā. 2 vols. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 26, 
41. Baroda: Oriental Institute.
. 1958. The Indian Buddhist Iconography, 
Mainly Based on the S ādhanam ālā and Other 
Cognate T āntric Texts of Rituals. Calcutta: Mu-
khopadhyay.
Bhaṭṭācāryya, Satyavrata Sāmaśrami (ed.). [1872.] 
‘Kāra ṇḍavyūhaḥ. Mahāyānasūtram. Baud-
dhaśāstram. Mahāsatvāryyāvalokiteśvarabo-
dhisatvasya prabhāvavarṇanāmukhena Śrīmad- 
bhagavannāmaka-tathāgata-kathito dharma-  
granthaḥ. ‘Pratnakamranandinī’-sampāda-
ka-śrīSatyavrata-Sāmaśrami-Bhaṭṭācāryyeṇa 
bahutarayatnataḥ sampādya nāgarākṣaraiḥ 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   43 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 48] ---
Iain Sinclair44
prakāśitaḥ’, The Hindu Commentator: A 
Monthly Sanskrit Journal V(1). Śrīrāmapura. 
Boisselier, Jean. 1963. La statuaire du Champa:  
recherches sur les cultes et l’iconographie. Paris: 
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
. 1965. ‘Précisions sur quelques images 
khmères d’Avalokiteśvara. Les bas-reliefs de 
Bantãy Čhmàr’, Arts Asiatiques 11/1: 73–89. 
http://doi.org/ 10.3406/arasi.1965.916.
. 2008. ‘Identification of some Khmer images 
of Avalokiteśvara in the Bantãy Chmàr bas-  
reliefs’, in Natasha Eilenberg and Robert L. 
Brown (trans. and eds.), Studies on the Art of 
Ancient Cambodia: Ten Articles by Jean Boisse-
lier, pp. 303–326. Phnom Penh: Reyum Pub -
lishing.
Bopearachchi, Osmund. 2014. ‘Sri Lanka and Mar-
itime Trade: Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara as the 
Protector of Mariners’, in Parul Pandya Dhar 
and Upendra Singh (eds.), Asian Encounters: 
Exploring Connected Histories, pp. 161–187. New 
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
. [2017]. ‘Sri Lanka and the Maritime Trade: 
Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara as the Protector of 
Mariners’. PowerPoint presentation. URL: 
http://www.academia.edu/download/53316351/
Sri_Lanka_and_the_Maritime_Trade._Bodhi- 
sattva_Avalokitesvara_as_the_Protector_of_
Mariners.pdf.
Bryson, Megan. 2018. ‘Nation Founder and Univer -
sal Saviour: Guanyin and Buddhist Networks in 
the Nanzhao and Dali Kingdoms’, in Christoph 
Anderl, Carmen Meinert, and Ann Heirman 
(eds.), Buddhist Encounters and Identities Across 
East Asia. Dynamics in the History of Religions 
10, pp. 81–107. Leiden/Boston: Brill. http://doi.
org/10.1163/9789004366152_005.
Budi Istiawan. 2012. ‘New Finds of the Classical 
Period in West Sumatra’, in Mai Lin Tjoa-  
Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke, and Dominik 
Bonatz (eds.), Connecting Empires and States: 
Selected Papers from the 13th International  
Conference of the European Association of 
Southeast Asian Archaeologists, pp. 43–52.  
Singapore: NUS Press.
Bunker, Emma C. 2011. ‘Five-headed Shiva Images’, 
in Emma C. Bunker and Douglas Latchford, Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations of the Past, 
pp. 503–512. Chicago: Art Media Resources. 
Bunker, Emma C. and Douglas Latchford. 2011. 
Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations of the Past. 
Chicago: Art Media Resources.
Bu ston rin chen grub. c. 1360. Bu ston gsan yig (Bla 
ma dam par rnams kyis rjes su bzung ba’i tshul, 
bKa’ drin rjes su dran par byed pa). Collected 
Works 26: 7–149 (Buddhist Digital Resource 
Centre W1934). 
de Casparis, J.G. 1967. ‘The Date of the Grahi 
Buddha’, Journal of the Siam Society 55/1: 31–40. 
URL: www.siamese-heritage.org/jsspdf/1961/  
JSS_055_1c_Casparis_  DateOfGrahiBuddha.pdf.
Chakraborti, Haripada. 1970. Pāśupata sūtram with 
Pañcārtha-bhāṣya of Kau ṇḍinya. Translated 
with an Introduction on the history of Śaivism 
in India. Calcutta: Academic Publishers. 
Chambert-Loir, Henri. 2017. ‘The History of 
a History: Variant Versions of the Sulalat 
al-Salatin’, Indonesia 104: 121–177. http://doi.
org/10.1353/ind.2017.0013.
Chatterjee, Bijan Raj and Niranjan Prasad 
Chakravarti. 1933. India and Java. Part II (In -
scriptions). Calcutta: Greater Indian Society.
Chattopadhyaya, Alaka and Lama Chimpa. 1967. 
Atīśa and Tibet. [Calcutta]: Indian Studies: Past 
& Present.
Chutiwongs, Nandana. 1984. The Iconography of 
Avalokiteśvara in Mainland South East Asia. 
Leiden: D. Litt. Diss.
. 1994. ‘An Aspect of the Bodhisattva Ava-
lokiteśvara in Ancient Indonesia’, in Marijke J. 
Klokke and Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer (eds.), 
Ancient Indonesian Sculpture, pp. 98–114. 
Leiden: KITLV Press.
Colless, Brian E. 1969. ‘Persian Merchants and 
Missionaries in Medieval Malaya’, Journal 
of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society 42/2: 10–47. URL: https://www.jstor.org/
stable/41491992. 
Conti, Pia. 2014. ‘Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin 
Phimai: A New Reading of its Iconographic 
Message’, in Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. 
Murphy (eds.), Before Siam: Essays in Art and 
Archaeology , pp. 374–395 . Bangkok: River Books 
and the Siam Society. 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   44 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 49] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back45
Cowell, E.B. and J. Eggeling. 1876. ‘Catalogue of 
the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Pos-
session of the Royal Asiatic Society (Hodgson 
Collection)’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
(New Series) 8/1: 1–52.
Dalsheimer, Nadine. 2001. Les collections du musée 
national de Phnom Penh: L’art du Cambodge 
ancien. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient 
and Magellan & Cie.
Delhey, Martin. 2012. ‘Textual Sources of the Mañ-
juśriyamūlakalpa (Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa), With 
Special Reference to Its Early Nepalese Witness 
NGMPP A39/4’, Journal of the Nepal Research 
Centre XIV: 55–75.
Dhingra, Sonali. 2022. ‘Saviour “at the Time of 
Death”: Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First 
Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites’, in Andrea 
Acri and Peter Sharrock (eds.), The Creative 
South: Buddhist and Hindu Art in Medieval 
Maritime Asia, Volume 2: Odisha and Java. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Diskul, M.C. Subhadradis. 1980. ‘II: Śrīvijaya Art 
in Thailand’, in M.C. Subhadradis Diskul (ed.), 
The Art of Śrīvijaya, pp. 21–43. Petaling Jaya: 
UNESCO Oxford University Press.
Donaldson, Thomas E. 2001. Iconography of the 
Buddhist Sculpture of Orissa. 2 vols. New Delhi: 
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts. 
Dutt, Nalinaksha. 1953. Saddharmapu ṇḍarī- 
kasūtram. With N. D. Mironov’s Readings from 
Central Asian MSS. Calcutta: The Asiatic Society.
Edwards McKinnon, Edmund, and Ichwan 
Azhari. Forthcoming. ‘An Eight-armed Bronze 
Amoghapasa Image from Kota Rentang, North -
ern Sumatra’. Unpublished draft.
Eilenberg, Natasha. 1997. ‘A South Indian Śiva 
Naṭarāja Bronze in the Collection of Robert 
Hatfield Ellsworth’, in Natasha Eilenberg, M.C. 
Subhadradis Diskul, and Robert L. Brown (eds.), 
Living a Life in accord with Dhamma: Papers in 
Honor of Professor Jean Boisselier on his Eight-
ieth Birthday, pp. 162–175. Bangkok: Silpakorn 
University. 
Ery Soedewo. 2012. ‘Persamaan Dan Perbedaan 
Unsur Logam Benda-Benda Perunggu Sumatera 
Bagian Utara Dengan Benda-Benda Perunggu 
Jawa Tengah: Antara Kemandirian Teknis Dan Pemenuhan Konsep (Similarities and Differenc -
es on Metal Attribute of Bronze Artifacts from 
Northern Sumatera and Central Java: Between 
Technical Autonomy and Conceptual Comple-
tion)’, Berkala Arkeologi 32/2: 151–166. http://doi.
org/10.30883/jba.v32i2.54.
Ferlus, Michel. 2009. ‘Formation of Ethnonyms in 
Southeast Asia’. Paper presented at the 42nd 
International Conference on Sino-Tibetan 
Languages and Linguistics, Payap Univer-
sity, Chiang Mai, Thailand, November 2009.  
URL: https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-  
01182596/.
Ferrand, G. 1922. L’empire sumatranais de Çrīvijaya. 
Paris: Paul Geuthner.
Fontein, Jan. 1990. The Sculpture of Indonesia. 
Washington, D.C. and New York: National 
Gallery of Art and H.N. Abrams.
Goudriaan, T. and C. Hooykaas. 1971. Stuti and 
Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and Vaiṣ ṇava) of 
Balinese Brahman Priests. Amsterdam/London: 
North-Holland Publishing Company.
Graldi, Aurora. 2019. Transforming the Buddha: 
A Biography of the Monumental Buddha of 
Guita Bahī, Lalitpur, and its Implication for 
the Nepalese School of Sculpture in Metal. PhD 
dissertation, University of Vienna.
Green, Phillip S.E. 2014. ‘The Many Faces of 
Lokeśvara: Tantric Connections in Cambodia 
and Campā between the Tenth and Thirteenth 
Centuries’, History of Religions 54/1: 69–93. 
http://doi.org/ 10.1086/676513.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2018. ‘The Corpus of Inscriptions 
in the Old Malay Language’, in Daniel Perret 
(ed.), Writing for Eternity: A Survey of Epigra-
phy in Southeast Asia , pp. 277–283. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient. 
van Gulik, R.H. 1935. Hayagrīva: The Mantrayānic 
Aspect of Horse-cult in China and Japan. Leiden: 
E.J. Brill. 
Guy, John. 1995. ‘The Avalokiteśvara of Yunnan 
and some South East Asian Connections’, in 
Rosemary Scott and John Guy (eds.), South East 
Asia & China: Art, Interaction & Commerce. 
Colloquies on Art & Archaeology in Asia No. 
17, pp. 64–83. London: School of Oriental and 
African Studies, Percival David Foundation of 
Chinese Art.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   45 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 50] ---
Iain Sinclair46
. (ed.). 2014. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist 
Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia. Bangkok and 
New York: River Books and the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art.
Hahn, Michael. 2014. ‘Śākyarakṣita’s Vṛttamālāvivṛ -
ti on Jñānaśrīmitra’s Vṛttamālāstuti (2)’, South 
Asian Classical Studies 9: 1–64.
Hall, Kenneth R. 2000. ‘Personal Status and Rit-
ualized Exchange in Majapahit Java’, Archipel 
59: 51–96. http://doi.org/10.3406/arch.2000.3554.
Harris, Mark and Zainuddin Zainal. 1990. National 
Museum, Kuala Lumpur: History and Culture 
of Malaysia. Kuala Lumpur: The Pepin Press.
Heine-Geldern, Robert. 1925. Altjavanische Bronzen: 
aus dem Besitze der ethnographischen Sammlung 
des Naturhistorischen Museums in Wien. Artis 
thesaurus Band 1. Wien: C.W. Stern.
Hṛdaya: Amoghapāśahṛdaya nāma mahāyānasūtra, 
ed. Meisezahl (1962).
Indian Museum and Theresa McCullough. 2015. 
Treasures from Asia’s Oldest Museum: Buddhist 
Art from the Indian Museum, Kolkata. Singa -
pore: Asian Civilisations Museum.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel. 2002. The Malay Pen -
insula: Crossroads of the Maritime Silk Road 
(100 BC–1300 AD). Leiden: Brill. http://doi.
org/10.1163/9789047400684.
Jacques, Claude. 2005. ‘Deux problèmes posés 
par l’inscription de la stèle de Praḥ Khan K. 
908’, Aséanie 15: 11–31. http://doi.org/10.3406/
asean.2005.1844.
Kalparāja: Amoghapāśakalparāja. Sanskrit MS: 
Mikkyō Seiten Kenkyūkai 1996. Partial tran -
scripts include: Mikkyō Seiten Kenkyūkai 2001; 
Sasaki, Itō and Yamamoto 2010. Tibetan trans-
lation: D 686/Q 365. Chinese translation: T 1092.
Kitchener, Darrell J. and Heny Kustiarsih. 2019. 
Ceramics from the Musi River, Palembang, Indo -
nesia: Based on a Private Collection. Fremantle: 
Australian National Centre of Excellence for 
Maritime Archaeology. 
Kozok, Uli and Eric van Reijn. 2010. ‘Ādityawar -
man: Three Inscriptions of the Sumatran 
“King of all Supreme Kings”’, Indonesia and 
the Malay World 38/110: 135–158. http://doi.
org/10.1080/13639811003665488.
Krairiksh, Piriya. [1980.] Art in Peninsular Thailand 
prior to the Fourteenth Century A.D. Bangkok: 
The Fine Arts Department.Krairiksh, Piriya; Narisa Chakrabongse (trans.). 
2012. The Roots of Thai Art. Bangkok: River 
Books.
Krishnan, Gauri Parimoo. 2016. ‘The Roots and 
Legacy of the Art of Nalanda as seen at Srivijaya’, 
in Gauri Parimoo Krishnan (ed.), Nalanda, Sri-  
vijaya and Beyond: Re-exploring Buddhist Art in 
Asia, pp. 153–200. Singapore: Asian Civilisations 
Museum. 
Krom, N.J. 1917. ‘Een sumatraansche Inscriptie van 
Köning Kṛtanagara’, Verslagen en Mededeelin-
gen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschap -
pen 5de reeks, deel II, Amsterdam, 1916: 306–344.
Kwa, Chong Guan. 1967–1968. ‘The Bidor Bronze 
Once More’, Journal of the Historical Society, 
University of Singapore, 1967–8: 62–64.
. 2010. ‘The Buddhist Origins of “Singapura”: 
Rereading Chapters I–VI of the Sejarah Melayu 
on Singapore’. Presentation at the Nalanda-Sri -
wijaya Centre, Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, 4 March 2010.
Lee, Yong-Hyun (이용현). 2004. The Niṣpanna-  
yogāvalī by Abhayākaragupta: A New Critical 
Edition of the Sanskrit Text. Seoul: Baegun Press.
Lefèvre, Vincent. 2007. Chefs-d’oeuvre du delta du 
Gange—Collections des musées du Bangladesh: 
Établissement Public du Musée des Arts Asia -
tiques Guimet, 24 octobre 2007–3 mars 2008. 
Paris: Éd. de la R éunion des musées nationaux. 
Leoshko, Janice. 1985. ‘The Appearance of 
Amoghapāśa in Pāla Period Art’, in A.K. Narain 
(ed.), Studies in Buddhist Art of South Asia, pp. 
127–135. New Delhi: Kanak Publications.
Li, Yu-min ( 李玉珉 ). 2010. ‘Dali guo Zhang Shengw -
en Fanxiang juan  luohan hua yanjiu 大理國張勝
溫《梵像卷》羅漢畫研究  (A Study of the Arhat 
Paintings in “Handscroll of Buddhist Images” by 
Zhang Shengwen of the Dali Kingdom)’, Taida 
Journal of Art History 29: 113–140.
Lokesh Chandra. 1999. Dictionary of Buddhist 
Iconography. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Internation -
al Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya 
Prakashan. 
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2008. ‘The Well-
known Javanese Statue in the Tropenmuseum, 
Amsterdam, and its place in Javanese Sculpture’, 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   46 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 51] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back47
Artibus Asiae 68/2: 287–332. URL: https://www.
jstor.org/stable/40599602.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline and Marijke J. Klokke. 
1988. Divine Bronze: Ancient Indonesian Bronzes 
from A.D. 600 to 1600. Leiden: Brill. 
Macdonald, Alexander W. and Anne Vergati Stahl. 
1979. Newar Art: Nepalese Art during the Malla 
Period. Warminster: Aris & Phillips Ltd.
Macdonald, Ariane. 1970. ‘IX. Le Dhānyakataka 
de Man-luṅs guru’, Bulletin de l’École fran-
çaise d’Extrême-Orient 57: 169–213. http://doi.
org/10.3406/befeo.1970.5416.
Mallmann, Marie Thérèse de. 1951. ‘Notes sur les 
bronzes du Yunnan représentant Avalokiteśva -
ra’, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 14/3–4: 
567–601. http://doi.org/10.2307/2718187.
Manabe, Shunsho ( 真鍋 俊照 ). 2016. ‘Fukūkenjaku 
Kannon no hyōgen to sono fuhensei 不空羂索
観音の表現とその普遍性  (The Representation 
of Fukūkenjaku kannon and Its Universality)’, 
(Abstract.) Journal of Indian and Buddhist 
Studies 65/1: 292–294. http://doi.org/10.4259/
ibk.65.3_1317.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. 1992. ‘Excavations in 
South Sumatra, 1988–90: New Evidence for 
Sriwijayan sites’, in Ian Glover (ed.), South-
east Asian Archaeology 1990: Proceedings of the 
Third Conference of the European Association 
of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, pp. 63–73. 
Hull: Centre for South-East Asian Studies, 
University of Hull.
. 2017. ‘At the Origins of Sriwijaya: The Emer -
gence of State and City in Southeast Sumatra’, 
in Noboru Karashima and Masashi Hirosue 
(eds.), State Formation and Social Integration 
in Pre-modern South and Southeast Asia: A 
Comparative Study of Asian Society , pp. 89–114. 
Tokyo/New Delhi: Toyo Bunko/Manohar. URL: 
http://id.nii.ac.jp/1629/00003625/.
Matsumura, Hisashi ( 松村 恒 ). 2011. ‘Sanbō kanō 
yōryaku roku no kōsei to kōzoku bunken no 
sono riyō 『三宝感応要略録』の構成と後続
文献のその利用  (The Structure of the Sanbao 
ganying yaoluelu and its Influence on Later 
Literature)’, Journal of Indian and Buddhist 
Studies 60/1: 260–267. http://doi.org/10.4259/
ibk.60.1_260.
Maxwell, Thomas S. 2007. ‘The Stele Inscription 
of Preah Khan, Angkor. Text with Translation and Commentary’, Udaya: Journal of Khmer 
Studies 8: 1–113.
McKeown, Arthur. 2010. From Bodhgayā to Lhasa 
to Beijing: The Life and Times of Śāriputra 
(c.1335–1426), Last Abbot of Bodhgayā. PhD 
dissertation, Harvard University.
Mechling, Mathilde, Brice Vincent, Pierre Baptiste, 
and David Bourgarit. 2018. ‘The Indonesian 
Bronze-Casting Tradition: Technical Investiga-
tions on Thirty-Nine Indonesian Bronze Statues 
(7th–11th c.) from the Musée National des Arts 
Asiatiques – Guimet, Paris’, Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 104: 63–139. http://
doi.org/ 10.3406/befeo.2018.6270. 
Meisezahl, R.O. 1962. ‘The Amoghapāśahṛ-
daya-dhāra ṇī: The Early Sanskrit Manuscript 
of the Reiunji Critically Edited and Translated’, 
Monumenta Nipponica 17/1: 265–328. http://doi.
org/10.2307/2383264.
. 1967. ‘Amoghapāśa: Some Nepalese Rep -
resentations and Their Vajrayānic Aspects’, 
Monumenta Serica 26: 455–497. http://doi.org/
10.1080/02549948.1967.11744976.
Melzer, Gudrun and Eva Allinger. 2012. ‘Die ne -
palesische Palmblatthandschrift der Aṣṭasāhas-
rikā Prajñāpāramitā aus dem Jahr NS 268 (1148 
AD), Teil II’, Berliner Indologische Studien 20: 
249–276. 
Mette, Adelheid (ed.). 1997. Die Gilgitfragmente 
des Kāra ṇḍavyūha. Swistal-Odendorf: Indica 
et Tibetica Verlag.
Mette, Adelheid, Noriyuki Kudo, Ruriko Sakuma, 
Chanwit Tudkeao, and Jiro Hirabayashi (eds.). 
2017. Gilgit Manuscripts in the National Ar-
chives of India, Facsimile Edition. Further 
Mahāyānasūtras vol. II. 4. New Delhi and 
Tokyo: The National Archives of India, The 
International Research Institute for Advanced 
Buddhology at Soka University.
Mikkyō Seiten Kenkyūkai ( 密教聖典研究会 ) (ed.). 
1996. Fukū kenjaku jinpen shingonkyō bonbun 
shahon ei’inban 不空羂索神変真言経梵文写本
影印版 . Tokyo: Taishō Daigaku Sōgō Bukkyō 
Kenkyūjo 大正大学綜合仏教研究所 .
. 2001. ‘Transcribed Sanskrit Text of the 
Amoghapāśakalparāja Part IV’, Annual of the 
Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, 
Taisho University 23: 1–73.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   47 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 52] ---
Iain Sinclair48
. 2004. Fukūkenjaku jinben shingongyō 
jumon shūsei: Bon-Kan taishō 『不空羂索神變
眞言經』呪文集成: 梵漢対照 . Tokyo: Nonburu 
(ノンブル ).
Miyaji, Akira. 2000. ‘A Bas-Relief of Eight-Armed 
Avalokiteśvara as Saviour of Men, probably 
from Swāt, Pakistan’, in European Association 
of South Asian Archaeologists, Maurizio Taddei 
and Giuseppe De Marco (eds.), South Asian 
Archaeology, 1997: Proceedings of the Fourteenth 
International Conference of the European Asso-
ciation of South Asian Archaeologists, held in the 
Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente, Palazzo 
Brancaccio, Rome, 7– 14 July 1997, pp. 1249–1266. 
Rome: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente. 
Miyazaki, Akiko ( 宮﨑 晶子 ). 2010. ‘The Roles of 
Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara in Angkor: Focusing 
on Descriptions on the Kāra ṇḍavyūha-sūtra’, 
The Journal of Sophia Asian Studies 28: 27–48. 
URI: http://digital-archives.sophia.ac.jp/repo-
sitory/view/repository/  00000026490.
. 2019. ‘Ank ōru no Kannon z ō ni miru ky ōten 
to zuz ō no kankeisei: Kārandavyūha shahon to 
no hikaku kara ( アンコールの観音像に見る経
典と図像の関係性―『カーランダヴューハ』写
本との比較から )’, in Takashi Koezuka 肥塚隆 
(ed.), Ajia Bukky ō bijutsu ronshū: T ōnan Ajia 
(アジア仏教美術論集　東南アジア ), pp. 353–
374. Tokyo: Chū ō Kōron Bijutsu Shuppan 中央
公論美術出版社 .
Moeller, Volker. 1985. Javanische Bronzen. Berlin: 
Mann.
Mori, Masahide ( 森 雅秀 ). 1997. ‘Orissa shūritsu 
hakubutsukan no mikky ō bijutsu オリッサ州
立博物館の密教美術 ’, Bulletin of the Research 
Institute of Esoteric Buddhist Culture 10: 191–232.
Murphy, Stephen A., Naomi Wang, and Alexandra 
Green. 2019. Raffles in Southeast Asia: Revisiting 
the Scholar and Statesman. Singapore: Asian 
Civilisations Museum.
Nakamura, Kayō ( 中村 夏葉 ). 2008. ‘Chūgoku 
Tonkō ni okeru Fukūkenjaku Kannon ni kan 
suru kenkyū ( 中国敦煌における不空羂索観
音像に関する研究 )’, Μεταπτυχιακά: Annual 
of the Office for the Promotion of Graduate 
Educational Research ( 名古屋大学大学院文学
研究科教育研究推進室年報 ) 2: 224–228. http://
doi.org/ 10.18999/meta.2.224.Nihom, Max. 1994. Studies in Indian and Indo-In-
donesian Tantrism: The Kuñjarakar ṇadhar -
makathana and the Yogatantra. Publications 
of the De Nobili Research Library XXI. Vienna: 
Sammlung De Nobili Institut für Indologie der 
Universität Wien.
Nik Hassan Shuhaimi. 1976. Buddhist Sculpture 
from Sumatra, Peninsular Malaysia and Pen-
insular Thailand during the Srīvijayan period 
(7th–14th c. A.D.). M.Phil thesis, University of 
London, School of Oriental and African Studies.
. 1977. ‘The Significance of Tiger Skin on the 
Avalokitesvara Images’, Malaysia in History 
XX/1: 24–31. URL: http://myrepositori.pnm.gov.
my/handle/123456789/3605.
Pal, Pratapaditya. 1966. ‘The Iconography of 
Amoghapāśa Lokeśvara—I’, Oriental Art 12: 
234–239. 
. 1967. ‘The Iconography of Amoghapāśa 
Lokeśvara—II’, Oriental Art 13: 20–28. 
. 2001. Desire and Devotion: Art from India, 
Nepal, and Tibet in the John and Berthe Ford 
Collection. Baltimore: Walters Art Museum.
Park, Hyounggook ( 朴亨國 ). 2019. ‘T ōnan Ajia ni 
okeru tapi Kannon no zuz ō ni tsuite 東南アジ
アにおける多臂観音の図像について  [On the 
Iconography of Multi-armed Avalokiteśvaras 
in Southeast Asia]’, in Takashi Koezuka 肥塚隆  
(ed.), Ajia Bukky ō bijutsu ronshū: T ōnan Ajia  
(アジア仏教美術論集　東南アジア ), pp. 287–
319. Tokyo: Chū ō Kōron Bijutsu Shuppan  
中央公論美術出版社 . 
Paul, Debjani. 1987. The Art of Nālandā: Devel -
opment of Buddhist Sculpture 600–1200 A.D. 
Leiden: Quick Service Drukkerij (proefschrift). 
Pigeaud, Theodore G. 1960. Java in the 14th 
Century: A Study in Cultural History. The Nāga -
ra-Kĕrtāgama by Rakawi Prapañca of Majapahit, 
1365 A.D. Vol. I: Javanese texts in transcription. 
3rd ed. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Pou, Saveros (ed. and trans.). 2002. Nouvelles ins-
criptions du Cambodge, II & III. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Quaritch Wales, H.G. 1940. ‘Archaeological Re -
searches on Ancient Indian Colonization in 
Malaya’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society XVIII Part I: i–xiii, 1–85.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   48 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 53] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back49
. 1976. The Malay Peninsula in Hindu Times. 
London: Bernard Quaritch Ltd.
Reichle, N. 2007. Violence and Serenity: Late Bud-
dhist Sculpture from Indonesia. Honolulu: Uni-
versity of Hawai‘i Press.
Reis-Habito, Maria. 1999. ‘The Amoghapāśa 
Kalparāja: A Historical and Analytical Study’, 
Studies in East and Central Asian Religions 11: 
39–67.
Roberts, Peter Alan and Tulku Yeshi. 2013–2016. 
’phags pa za ma tog bkod pa zhes bya ba theg pa 
chen po’i mdo: The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra ‘The 
Basket’s Display’. Āryakāra ṇḍavyūhanāmama-
hāyānasutra. 84000: Translating the Words of 
the Buddha. Degé Kangyur, vol. 51 (mdo sde, 
pa), folios 200.a-247.b. v 2.41. URL: http://
read.84000.co/translation/toh116.html.
Robson, Stuart O. (trans.); Mpu Prapañca. 1995. 
Deśawar ṇana (Nāgarakṛtāgama). Verhande -
lingen van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde, 169. Leiden: KITLV 
Press. 
Sakuma, Ruriko ( 佐久間 留理子 ). 2002. Sādha-
namālā: Avalokiteśvara section. Sanskrit and 
Tibetan texts. Delhi: Adroit.
. 2006. ‘A Historical Background of the 
Trailokyavaśaṅkarabhugma Lokeśvara sādhana  
in the Sādhanamālā’. Nagoya Studies in Indian 
Culture and Buddhism: Saṃbhāṣā 25: 1–13. 
http://doi.org/ 10.18999/sambh.25.1.
. 2007. ‘Kanjizai bosatsu no shosetsu to 
bijutsu: Dai-Ei Toshokan zō Kārandavyūha 
sōshuku shahon o chūshin ni tsuite 観自在菩
薩の説話と美術―大英図書館蔵『カーランダ ˙
ヴューハ』装飾写本を中心として ’, in Miyaji 
Akira sensei kenti ronbunshū henshū iinkai 宮
治昭先生献呈論文集編集委員会  (eds.), Han ajia 
no bukkyō bijutsu 汎アジアの仏教美術 , pp. 
172–195. Tokyo: Chūōkōron Bijutsu Shuppan  
(中央公論美術出版 ).
. 2015. Kannon bosatsu: hengen jizai na 
sugata o toru kyūsaisha ( 観音菩薩: 変幻自在な
姿をとる救済者 ). Tokyo: Shunjusha 春秋社 .
. 2017. ‘Nepāru no Fukūkenjaku Kanjizai 
mandara—giki to nunosei kaiga ネパールの不
空羂索観自在マンダラ―儀軌と布製絵画―
(Maṇḍala of Amoghapāśa-lokeśvara in Nepal: Its Ritual Texts and Cloth Paintings)’, Journal 
of Indian and Buddhist Studies 65/2: 892–886. 
http://doi.org/ 10.4259/ibk.65.2_892.
. 2019. ‘Appearances of Avalokiteśvara in 
the Kāra ṇḍavyūha-sūtra: Their Functions and 
Religious Backgrounds’, Nagoya Studies in 
Indian Culture and Buddhism: Saṃbhāṣā 35: 
73–97.
Sasaki, Daiju ( 佐々木 大樹 ), Gyōkan Itō ( 伊藤 
堯貫 ), and Shoichiro Yamamoto ( 山本 匠一
郎). 2010. ‘Transcribed Sanskrit Text of the 
Amoghapāśakalparāja Part VI’, Annual of the 
Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, 
Taisho University 32: 170–207.
Schaik, Sam van. 2006. ‘The Tibetan Avalokiteśvara 
Cult in the Tenth Century: Evidence from the 
Dunhuang Manuscripts’, in Ronald M. David-
son and Christian Wedemeyer (eds.), Tibetan 
Buddhist Literature and Praxis. Proceedings of 
the Tenth Seminar of the IATS, 2003, Vol. 4, pp. 
55–72. Leiden: Brill.
Schlüter, Lisa. 2010. ‘Materials for the Medieval 
History of Indonesia: Java1365.Nagara-Kertag-
ama.Canto.38.3-49’. Hamburg: Universität 
Hamburg. URL: http://www.spaetmittelalter.
uni-hamburg.de/java-history/JavaNK/Java1365.
Nagara-Kertagama.Canto.38.3-49.html.
Schoterman, Jan A. 1994. ‘A Surviving Amoghapāśa 
Sādhana: Its Relation to the Five Main Statues 
of Candi Jago’, in Marijke J. Klokke and Pauline 
Lunsingh Scheurleer (eds.), Ancient Indonesian 
Sculpture, pp. 154–175. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Seki, Chisato ( 関千里 ). 1996. Tōnan Ajia no kobi-
jutsu: sono miryoku to rekishi 東南アジアの古
美術: その魅力と歴史  (South East Asian Arts: 
From Ancient Time to 17th Century). Tokyo: 
Mekon ( めこん ).
Sen, Tansen. 2009. ‘The Military Campaigns of Ra -
jendra Chola and the Chola-Srivijaya-China 
Triangle’, in Hermann Kulke, K. Kesavapany, 
and Vijay Sakhuja (eds.), Nagapattinam to 
Suvarnadwipa: Reflections on the Chola Naval 
Expeditions to Southeast Asia, pp. 61–75. Singa-
pore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Shakya, Miroj (ed.). 2010. Catalogue of Digitized 
Rare Sanskrit Buddhist Manuscripts. Vol. 1: 
1–200. Rosemead: University of the West.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   49 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 54] ---
Iain Sinclair50
Sharrock, Peter. 2007. ‘The Mystery of the Bayon 
Face Towers’, in Joyce Clark (ed.), Bayon: New 
Perspectives, pp. 230–281. Bangkok: River Books. 
. 2013. ‘The Tantric Roots of the Buddhist 
Pantheon of Jayavarman VII’, in Marijke J. 
Klokke and Véronique Degroot (eds.), Materi-
alizing Southeast Asia’s Past: Selected Papers 
from the 12th International Conference of the 
European Association of Southeast Asian  
Archaeologists. Vol. 2, pp. 41–55. Singapore: NUS 
Press.
. 2015. Banteay Chhmar: Garrison-temple of 
the Khmer Empire. Bangkok: River Books.
Shinohara, Koichi. 2010. ‘The All-Gathering 
Maṇḍala Initiation Ceremony in Atikūṭa’s Col -
lected Dhāraṇī Scriptures: Reconstructing the 
Evolution of Esoteric Buddhist Ritual’. Journal 
Asiatique 298/2: 389–420. http://doi.org/ 10.2143/
JA.298.2.2062439.
. 2014. ‘Dhāra ṇīs and Visions in Early  
Esoteric Buddhist Sources in Chinese Transla-
tion’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 77/1: 85–103. http://doi.
org/10.1017/S0041977X13000931.
Siddhanta, Sachindra Nath. 1979. A Descriptive 
Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Varen-
dra Research Museum Library. Vol. I. Rajshahi: 
Varendra Research Museum. 
Sinclair, Iain. 2015. ‘The Creation of Theism Person -
ified: A Conceptual History of the God-Maker 
Avalokiteśvara’, in Andrea A. Di Castro and 
David Templeman (eds.), Asian Horizons: Gi-
useppe Tucci’s Buddhist, Indian, Himalayan and 
Central Asian Studies, pp. 431–478. Melbourne: 
Monash University Publishing.
. 2016a. ‘Coronation and Liberation Accord -
ing to a Javanese Monk in China: Bianhong’s 
Manual on the abhiṣeka of a cakravartin’, in 
Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in  
Mediaeval Maritime Asia, pp. 30–66, 389–391. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute. http://
doi.org/ 10.1355/9789814695091-005.
. 2016b. The Appearance of Tantric Monas-
ticism in Nepal: A History of the Public Image 
and Fasting Ritual of Newar Buddhism, 980–
1380. PhD dissertation, Monash University. 
http://doi.org/ 10.4225/03/58ab8cadcf152.. 2017. Addenda and Errata. [s.p.] http://doi.
org/10.6084/m9.figshare.13387175.v3.
. 2018. ‘New Light on the Karimun Besar 
Inscription (Prasasti Pasir Panjang) and the 
Learned Man from Gaur’, NSC Highlights 11: 
16–17. URL: http://hdl.handle.net/11540/9401.
. 2019a. ‘Sang Sapurba/Maulivarmadeva, 
First of the Last Indo-Malay Kings’, NSC  
Highlights 12: 6–8. URL: http://hdl.handle.
net/11540/9986.
. 2019b. ‘Sanskritic Buddhism as an Asian 
Universalism’, in Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, 
Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee (eds.), 
Imagining Asia: Networks, Actors, Sites, pp. 
275–333. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Insti-
tute. http://doi.org/ 10.1355/9789814818865-012.
. 2019c. ‘Saviour of the South Seas: A Srivi-
jayan Bodhisattva and its Transasiatic Journey’. 
Public lecture. Singapore: Asian Civilisations 
Museum, 16 August 2019.
. Forthcoming. ‘Gautamaśrī: A Bengali Bud -
dhist pundit in transit through the Himalayas 
and the Singapore Strait’. Unpublished draft.
Skilling, Peter. 2019. ‘Many Lands of Gold’, in 
Bunchar Pongpanich and Somchet Thinapong 
(eds.), Suvarnabhumi: The Golden Land,  
pp. 191–217. Bangkok: Geo-Informatics and 
Space Technology Development Agency 
(GISTDA) and Buddhadasa Indapanno  
Archives (BIA). 
Soper, Alexander C. and Helen B. Chapin. 1970. ‘A 
Long Roll of Buddhist Images. I’, Artibus Asiae 
32/1: 5–41. http://doi.org/ 10.2307/3249551.
Sørensen, Henrik H. 2020. ‘Donors and Esoteric 
Buddhism in Dunhuang during the Reign of 
the Guiyijun’, in Henrik Sørensen and Carmen 
Meinert (eds.), Buddhism in Central Asia I. 
Patronage, Legitimation, Sacred Space, and 
Pilgrimage. Dynamics in the History of Reli -
gions 11, pp. 91–122. Leiden: Brill. http://doi.
org/10.1163/9789004417731_006.
Speyer, J.S. 1904a. ‘Eene Buddhistische inscriptie 
afkomstig van Java’, Verslagen en mededeelingen 
der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen. 
Afdeeling Letterkunde 4/6: 138–144.
. 1904b. ‘Eene Buddhistische inscriptie af -
komstig van Java (2de artikel)’, Verslagen en 
mededeelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van 
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   50 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 55] ---
From Melayu to Thamel and Back51
Wetenschappen. Afdeeling Letterkunde 4/6: 
253–262.
Sri Ambarwati Kusumadewi. 2012. ‘Ādityawarman 
(1347–1374 Masehi): Kajian Epigrafi’. Master 
Humaniora, Universitas Indonesia.
Srinivasan, Sharada. 2013. ‘Techno-cultural Per -
spectives on Medieval Southeast Asia and 
Southern India: Pallava Bronzes and Beyond’, in 
Marijke J. Klokke and Véronique Degroot (eds.), 
Materializing Southeast Asia’s Past: Selected 
Papers from the 12th International Conference 
of the European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, vol. 2, pp. 167–178. Singapore: 
NUS Press.
Stearns, Cyrus. 1996. ‘The Life and Tibetan Legacy 
of the Indian Mahāpaṇḍita Vibhūticandra’, 
Journal of the International Association of Bud-
dhist Studies 19/1: 127–171. http://doi.org/ 10.2143/
JIABS.19.1.3285951.
Suzuki, Koshin ( 鈴木 晃信 ), Nobuo Ōtsuka  
(大塚 伸夫 ), and Hideaki Kimura ( 木村 秀明 ).  
2000. ‘Transcribed Sanskrit Text of the 
Amoghapāśakalparāja, Part III’, Annual of the 
Institute for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, 
Taisho University 22: 1–64.
Takeuchi, Kōzen ( 武内 孝善 ). 1976. ‘Sōdai hon’yaku 
kyōten no tokushoku ni tsuite fu·Sōdai hon’ya-
ku kyōten hennen mokuroku 宋代翻訳経典の
特色について附˙宋代翻訳経典編年目録  (On 
the Translation of Sutras in “Sung” ( 宋) period. 
Appendix: A Chronological Catalogue of the 
Translations)’, Journal of Esoteric Buddhism 113: 
27–53. http://doi.org/10.11168/jeb1947.1976.27.
Tanaka, Kimiaki ( 田中 公明 ). 2010. Indo ni okeru 
mandara no seiritsu to hatten ( インドにおけ
る曼荼羅の成立と発展 ). Tokyo: Shunjūsha  
(春秋社 ).
. 2016a. ‘“Indo no butsu” ten ni shuppin 
sareta ‘Hassenju Hannyakyo’ sōshoku shahon 
ni tsuite 「インドの仏」展に出品された『八千
頌般若経』装飾写本について (The Sanskrit 
Manuscript of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Prajñāpāra- 
mitā Exhibited at the Exhibition “Indian Bud-
dhist Art, from Indian Museum, Kolkata” held 
at Tokyo National Museum)’, The Memoirs of 
the Institute for Advanced Studies on Asia 169: 
viii, 117–130. http://doi.org/ 10.15083/00026810.. 2016b. ‘Orissa hatsugen no mandara-teki 
kōzō o motta Chundā (Shundai) zō ni tsuite オ
リッサ発現の曼荼羅的構造をもったチュンダー
(准提)像について (The Image of Cundā, which 
has a Maṇḍala-like Composition, from Orissa)’, 
The Memoirs of the Institute for Advanced 
Studies on Asia 170: iii–iv, 399–410. http://doi.
org/10.15083/00026797.
. 2018. Bonbun monju kong ō kuden kenky ū 
梵文「文殊金剛口伝」研究 (Mañjuvajramu-  
khyākhyāna: Introduction, Romanized Sanskrit 
Text and Related Articles). Tokyo: Watanabe -
shuppan ( 渡辺出版 ).
. 2019. An Illustrated History of the Mandala: 
From its Genesis to the Kalacakratantra. Boston: 
Wisdom Publications.
Taniguchi Kōsei ( 谷口 耕生) . 2002. ‘Nara Kokuritsu 
Hakubutsukan zō kenpon choshoku Fukūken-
saku Kannon zō 奈良国立博物館蔵 ―絹本著色
不空羂索観音像 (On the Nara National Muse-
um’s Buddhist Painting Fukūsensaku Kannon)’, 
Bulletin of the Nara National Museum 4: 59–70. 
http://doi.org/ 10.24737/00000154.
Tobi, A.C. 1931. ‘De Buddhistische Bronzen in het 
Museum te Leiden’, Oudheidkundig Verslag 
1930, pp. 158–201. Batavia-Centrum: Albrecht 
& Co.
Tripathi, Ram Shankar and Thakur Sain Negi. 2006. 
Hevajratantram with Yogaratnamālāpañjikā 
of Mahāpa ṇḍitācārya Kṛṣ ṇapāda. Bibliotheca 
Indico-Tibetica series 65. Sarnath: Central In-
stitute of Higher Tibetan Studies.
Tuladhar-Douglas, Will. 2006. Remaking Buddhism 
for Medieval Nepal: The Fifteenth-century Refor-
mation of Newar Buddhism . London: Routledge.
Vaidya, P.L. (ed.). 1961. Mahāyānasūtrasaṃgraha. 
Part I. Darbhanga: The Mithila Institute.
. 1963. Saddharmalaṅkāvatārasūtram. Dar-
bhanga: The Mithila Institute.
Vajrācārya, Badrīratna. [2005.] Āryāvalokiteśvarayā 
bratayā utpatti va saṃkṣipta ma ṇḍala-bhāvana. 
Yeṃ: Vajrācārya Saṃrakṣaṇa Guṭhī.
Vajrācārya, Herākāzī. 1999. Guitaḥyā Bahi vihāra 
saṃgha (Gustala mahāvihāra, Prathamaśrī 
mahāvihāra, Vasūccaśīla mahāvihāra) chagu 
adhyayana. Guitaḥ, Yala: Dīpāvatī Pustakālaya.
Vetturini, Gianpaolo. 2007. The bKa’ gdams pa 
School of Tibetan Buddhism. 2 vols. PhD disser -
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   51 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 56] ---
Iain Sinclair52
tation, University of London, School of Oriental 
and African Studies.
Wade, Geoff. 2014. ‘Beyond the Southern Borders: 
Southeast Asia in Chinese Texts to the Ninth 
Century’, in John Guy (ed.), Lost Kingdoms: 
Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast 
Asia, pp. 25–31. Bangkok and New York: River 
Books and Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Wattanavrangkul, Snong. 1975. Outstanding sculp-
tures of Buddhist and Hindu gods from private 
collections in Thailand. [Bangkok]: Rianthong 
Kanpim.
Willson, Martin and Martin Brauen. 2000. Deities 
of Tibetan Buddhism: The Zürich Paintings  
of the Icons worthwhile to see: bris sku mthoṅ  
ba don ldan. Boston, MA: Wisdom Publica-  
tions.
Wong, Dorothy ( 王靜芬 ). 2015. ‘Bukong juansuo 
Guanyin xin tan 不空羂索觀音新探 ’, Journal 
of the Dunhuang and Turfan Studies 15: 17–52.
Woodward, Hiram. 1994–95. ‘The Jayabud -
dhamahānātha Images of Cambodia’, The Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 52/53: 105–111. 
URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20169099. 
. 2003. The Art and Architecture of Thailand: 
From Prehistoric Times through the Thirteenth 
Century. Leiden: Brill.
. 2007. ‘The Karandavyuha Sutra and Bud-
dhist Art in 10th Century Cambodia’, in Prat-
apaditya Pal (ed.), Buddhist Art: Form and 
Meaning, pp. 70–83. Mumbai: Marg Publica -
tions.
. 2015. ‘Aspects of Buddhism in Tenth-cen-
tury Cambodia’, in D. Christian Lammerts (ed.), 
Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early 
Modern Southeast Asia , pp. 218–260. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. 
Wyatt, David K. 2001. ‘Relics, Oaths and Politics in 
Thirteenth-Century Siam’, Journal of Southeast 
Asian Studies 32/1: 3–65. http://doi.org/ 10.1017/
S0022463401000017.
Yoritomi, Motohiro ( 頼富本宏 ). 1990. Mikkyōbut-
su no kenkyū 密教仏の研究  (The Evolution of 
Esoteric Buddhism). Kyoto: Hōzōkan ( 法蔵館 ).
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   52 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 57] ---
Appendix 2.1: 
The corpus of images from the Śrīvijayan period
The following symbols are used in the inventory of images: ? = unidentified, × = damaged, – = no 
discernible object. All measurements of images are taken from the selected literature. See also the open 
dataset Daivatanidhi (doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.17287115).
material h/w date collection right hands left hands findspot selected
(cm) literature
1 bronze 13.5 9th 
cent.rosary?, 
abhaya , –, 
varada–, ?, –, 
waterpotKota Rentang, 
Deli Serdang 
regency, 
SumatraEdwards 
McKinnon 
and Azhari 
forthcoming
2 bronze 13.7×7.8 c. 
850–899Rijksmuseum, 
Amsterdam, AK-
RAK-1992-3rosary, abhaya ?, 
? (hook or 
noose), varadabook?, 
trident?, 
lotus?, 
waterpotunknown 
(presumably 
Indonesia)Lunsingh 
Scheurleer and 
Klokke 1988: 87 , 
no. 35 ; Reichle 
2007: 109,  fig. 
4.21 
3 bronze? 15×6 8 th–
10th 
cent. Balai Pelestarian 
Peninggalan Purbakala 
Batusangka, Dok. BP3 Batusangkarrosary?, ×, 
abhaya , ×–, ×, lotus, ? 
(waterpot?) Candi Pulau 
Sawah 2 , 
Dharmasraya regency, 
SumatraBudi Istiawan 
2012: 49 , fig. 4.7;  
Ery Soedewo 
2012: 156 , Foto 11 
4 silver unknown 9th–
11th 
cent.unknown (Museum 
Nasional, Jakarta?; base 
marked ‘626 .b.’ )rosary?, 
abhaya , ?, 
varadabook, ? 
(noose or 
trident), 
lotus stalk, × 
(waterpot?)Y ogyakarta, 
JavaLeiden 
University 
Digital 
Collections 
Photographs 
(Kern Institute) 
OD- 1523, OD-
1523a
5 bronze 16.5 9th 
cent. MMoA, New Y ork, 
1987.142.194rosary, ?, 
abhaya , varadabook, noose, 
lotus stalk, 
waterpotJava (or 
‘Sivachai’)n.d. 1966  
6 bronze 20.6 8th–
10th 
cent. Rijksmuseum voor 
Volkenkunde, Leiden, 
RV-1403 -1874hook?, ×, ×, 
varadabook?, ×, 
×, ×Java Tobi 1931: 181, 
cat. 1874,  pl. 52d;  
Pal 1966: 236,  
fig. 1 ; Lunsingh 
Scheurleer and 
Klokke 1988: 58,  
no. 6 ; Srinivasan 
2013: 176, fig. 13.6
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   53 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 58] ---
Iain Sinclair54
material h/w date collection right hands left hands findspot selected
(cm) literature
7 bronze 21.5 none 
given 
(c. 
8th–
10th 
cent.)Ethnographische 
Sammlung des 
Naturhistorischen 
Staatsmuseums, 
Viennarosary, ?, 
abhaya ?, 
varadabook, 
noose?, 
lotus, 
waterpotJava (? the 
collection of 
origin is in 
Surakarta)Heine-Geldern 
1925 : 21, no. 11 , 
pl. 11
8 bronze 21.6 9th 
cent. Calon Da Collection rosary?, ?, 
abhaya ?, ×book?, lotus, 
waterpot?, ?‘Northern 
Thailand’Bunker and 
Latchford 2011 : 
194–195 , fig. 6.6
9 bronze 22 9th 
cent. Bangkok National 
Museum (inventory 
number unknown)×, ×, ×, × book, ?, ?, 
waterpotChaiya, 
Surat Thani 
province 
(Nik Hassan 
Shuhaimi) or 
Y ala province, 
BetongNik Hassan 
Shuhaimi 1976 : 
pl. 46 ; Jacq-
Hergoualc’h 
2002 : pl. 145
10 bronze 22.5 c. 
8th–
10th 
cent. Ethnographische 
Sammlung des 
Naturhistorischen 
Staatsmuseums, Viennarosary, ?, 
abhaya , varadabook, ?, 
lotus stalk?, 
waterpotJava (? the 
collection of 
origin is in 
Surakarta)Heine-Geldern 
1925 : 20, no. 10 , 
pl. 10
11 bronze 24×12.7 7th–
9th 
cent. Vereniging van Vrienden der Aziatische 
Kunst, Haas- 
trecht, on loan from 
Rijksmuseum, AK-
MAK-1234?, –, ×, varada book?, –, –, – Bantaeng, 
Bontonompo 
district, Gowa 
regency, South 
SulawesiLunsingh 
Scheurleer and 
Klokke 1988 : 111 , 
no. 59  
12 bronze 28 10th 
cent.British Museum, London, 1859 , 1228.75rosary, hook?, 
lotus, varadabook, conch, 
–, waterpotPrambanan, 
Y ogyakarta, 
JavaMurphy et al. 
2019 : 177 , no. 147
13 copper 
alloy41×23.2 8th–
9th 
cent.Private collection rosary, ×, ?, × book, –, 
lotus stalk?,– 
(varada ?)‘reportedly SE 
Sumatra’Guy 2014 : 253 , 
cat. 160  
14 bronze 40 c. 10 th 
cent. Skanda Trust rosary, hook, 
abhaya , varadabook, lotus 
stalk, ×, 
waterpotAnlong Veng 
District, south 
of Preah 
VihearBunker and Latchford 2011 : 
198–199 , fig. 6.8
15 bronze 46 9th 
cent. Dr Viroj Karnasut, 
Bangkokrosary, abhaya ?, 
?, varadabook, ?, –, ? ‘Possibly 
discovered 
in the Malay 
peninsula’Wattanavrangkul 
1975 : fig. 53 ; 
Nik Hassan 
Shuhaimi 1976 : 
pl. 23 ; Diskul 
1980 : 52, no. 28 ; 
Jacq-Hergoualc’h 
2002 : pl. 118
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   54 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 59] ---
Appendix 2.155
material h/w date collection right hands left hands findspot selected
(cm) literature
16 stone 53 9th–
10th 
cent. Museum Nasional, 
Jakarta Inv. 6024rosary?, ×, ×, × ×, ×, ×, × Muara Sungai 
Komering, Palembang, 
Sumatra 
[1929 ]Bernet Kempers 
1959 : pl. 175 ; Nik 
Hassan Shuhaimi 
1976 : pl. 33 ; 
Fontein 1990 : 
214, cat. 59 ; Guy 
2014 : 254 , n. 1; 
Bambang Budi 
Utomo 2013 : 
10, Foto 10 ; ibid . 
2016 : 132 , no. 53 ; 
Krishnan 2016 : 
179, pl. 20
17 copper 
alloy76.4 c. 
750–
800 Bangkok National 
Museum SV24×, ×, ×, × ×, ×, ×, × Wat Phra 
Borommathat, 
Chaiya, Surat 
ThaniNik Hassan 
Shuhaimi 1976 : 
pl. 36 ; Diskul 
1980 : 52, pl. 
26; Krairiksh 
[1980 ]: 142 , pl. 
32; Jacq-Her-
goualc’h 2002 : 
312, pl. 108 ; 
Krairiksh 2012 : 
248, pl. 2.196 ; 
Bambang Budi 
Utomo 2013 : 21, 
Foto 26 ; Guy 
2014 : 259 , cat. 
166; Krishnan 
2016 : 187 , pl. 28
18 copper 
alloy93×51 8th–
10th 
cent. National Museum, 
Kuala Lumpur, 
MN.BALAIB. 40.2008rosary, ×, ?, 
varadabook, 
lotus stalk, 
noose?, 
waterpotBidor, Batang 
Padang, Perak 
[1936 ]Quaritch Wales 
1940 : 51, pl. 79 ; 
Pal 1966 : 237 ; 
Kwa 1967 –1968 ; 
Nik Hassan 
Shuhaimi 1976 : 
pl. 35 ; Quaritch 
Wales 1976 : 
pl. 11 ; Harris 
and Zainal 
1990 : 13; Jacq-
Hergoualc’h 
2002 : fig. 160 ; 
Bambang Budi 
Utomo 2013 : 
20, Foto 24 ; 
Guy 2014 : 250 , 
cat. 157  et al.; 
Krishnan 2016 : 
183, fig. 23 ; Park 
2019 : 303 , fig. 14
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   55 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 60] ---
Iain Sinclair56
material h/w date collection right hands left hands findspot selected
(cm) literature
19 bronze? unknown no 
date 
(c. 9th 
cent.)Bảo tàng Lịch sử Việt 
Nam no discernible 
objects ×, ×, lotus?, 
×Đang Bình, 
Ninh Thuận 
provinceBoisselier 
1963 : fig. 31 ; 
Chutiwongs 
1984 : pl. 177 ; 
Béguin 2009 : 166
20 bronze? unknown no 
date 
(9th–
10th 
cent.) exhibited at Kunsthal, 
Rotterdam, 2009.rosary, ×, ×, 
varadabook, lotus 
stalk, ?, 
waterpotunknown 
(Indonesia)URL: https://
www.flickr.com/
photos/10015390  
@
N00/3653707919
21 bronze? unknown 9th 
cent.Museum Ranggawarsita rosary, ?, 
noose?, varadabook, hook,  
waterpot, 
lotus stalkunknown 
(Indonesia)Lokesh Chandra 
1999 : 304 ; Park 
2019 : 301 , fig. 11
22 bronze 18.8×7 10th–
11th 
cent.Museon, The Hague, 
Inv. 48659rosary, ?, ?,
?hook?, ?, 
waterpot, 
lotus stalkunknown 
(Java)URL: https://hdl.
handle.net/
21.12123/16939
23 bronze? 15×5 none 
given 
(8th–
10th 
cent.) Museon, The Hague, 
Inv. 48675  (“Mogelijk 
een copie”)rosary, ?, ?,
??, ?, waterpot, 
lotus stalkunknown 
(Java)URL: https://hdl.
handle.net/
21.12123/16954
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   56 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 61] ---
Appendix 2.157
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   57 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 62] ---
Iain Sinclair58
Fig. 2.15: Eight-armed Amoghapāśa statues from the Malay Archipelago, drawn to approximate relative 
scale, where known, 7th–11th centuries. Hand drawings after supplied or published photographs. 
Numeric labels correspond to Appendix 2.1.
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   58 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 63] ---
Sigla
A:  Amoghapāśapūjā Aṣṭamīvrata, MS Shakya (2010 : 21) No. 17, paper, n.d. (c. 20 th century), ff. 3v 10–8r 4.
B:  Śuklāṣṭamīvratavidhāna, MS Shakya (2010 : 21) No. 18, paper, n.d. (c. 20 th century), ff. [27 ]r1–[33]v5.
C:  Vajrācārya, Badrīratna ed. (2005 :[2]–[7 ]). The word spacing of Vajrācārya’s text is cited verbatim 
in the apparatus.
D:  Untitled MS Asha Archives DPN 2159 , paper, n.d., ff. 6r 5–12r1.
tato maṇḍalarājāgrī nāma samādhiḥ188 | tadanu maitrīkaruṇāmuditopekṣācaturbrahmavihārān189 
vibhāvya190 
om̐ svabhāvaśuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāvaśuddho ’ham | śūnyatājñānavajrasva-  
bhāvātmako191 ’ham  ||
tato (ayam̐ kāreṇa niṣpannaṃ vāyumaṇḍalaṃ dhanvākāraṃ nīlapatākāṅkitaṃ192 tasyopari rephodbha-
vaṃ raktavarṇam agnimaṇḍalaṃ193 trikoṇaṃ raktarephāṅkitaṃ tadupari vam̐ kārapariniṣpannaṃ194 
vāruṇamaṇḍalaṃ195 vartulaṃ196 śuklavarṇaṃ śvetaghaṇṭāṅkitaṃ197 tadupari lam̐ kārasambhavaṃ 
māhendramaṇḍalaṃ caturasraṃ pītavarṇaṃ198 pītatriśucikavajraṃ catuṣkoneṣu suśobhitaṃ199 tadupari 
sum̐ kāraniṣpannaṃ catūratnamayam aṣṭaśṛṅgopaśobhitaṃ Sumerum200 |a) maṇiratnamayaṃ śrīmat-
188. samādhiḥ A samādhiṃ vakṣāmi BD samādhiṃ C 
189. maitr
īkaruṇāmuditopekṣā caturbrahmavihārān BC maitrīkaruṇāmuditopekṣā catubrahmavihārā D trīkaruṇā-  
muditopekṣāṃ caturbrahmavihāraṃ A
190. vibhāv
ya D bhāvayet ABC
191. śūnyat
ā- ABC śūnyatāṃ D
192. dhanvākāraṃ nīla patākāṅkitaṃ C dhanvākāraṃ nīlapatākāṃkita B dhanvākāranilāyatākāṃkite D dhanvābhaṃ 
nīlapatākāṃkitaṃ A
193. agnim
aṇḍalaṃ B≈C agnimaṇḍala D vahnimaṇḍalaṃ A
194. vam̐kār
aniṣpannaṃ A vaṃkārapariniṣpannaṃ B≈C vaṃkārapariniṣpaṃna D 
195. vāruṇ
amaṇḍalam B vārunimaṇḍalaṃ D varuṇamaṇḍalaṃ A vāyu maṇḍalaṃ C
196. vartu
laṃ A vaturaṃ B caturaśraṃ CD
197. śveta
ghaṇṭāṅkitaṃ A śukla patākāṅkitaṃ C śuklapadāṃkitaṃ B śuklapatākāṃkita D
198. pītavar
ṇṇaṃ B pitavarṇṇa· D≈C pītaṃ A
199. pitatriśucikavajraṃ catukoneṣu suśobhitaṃ D pītatriśuklavajra catukoṇaṃ suśobhitaṃ B pīta trisūcika vajra 
catuṣkoṇaṃ suśobhitam C koneṣu triśucikāṅkitavajraṃ A
200.  catūratnamayam aṣṭaśṛṃgopaśobhitaṃ sumeruṃ A saptaratnamayaṃ aṣṭāṃgasumeruṃ BC saptaratnamayaṃ 
aṣṭāṃgaśumyaru D Appendix 2.2: 
Amoghapāśama ṇḍalar
ājāgrī nāma samādhi— 
Sanskrit text and translation
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   59 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 64] ---
Iain Sinclair60
Potalakācalodaranivāsinaṃ201 kūṭāgāraṃ (bcaturdvāraṃ catustoraṇaṃ bhūṣitaṃ catuṣkoṇeṣu sarveṣu 
dvāraniryūhasandhiṣu candrārkavajracihnaṃ tu hārārdhahāraracitaṃ catuḥsūtrasamāyutaṃ202 paṭṭa- 
sragdāmabhūṣitaṃ203 bakulikramaśīrṣaparyantaṃ204 vajraratnakhacitakumbhastambhāḥ205 | mahāva -
jrakramaśīrṣas206 tu pakṣiṇī207 kiṅkiṇijālamaṇḍitam | dhvajair aṣṭair alaṅkṛtaṃ cāmarādivibhūṣitaṃb) 
haribahiḥ susaṃsthitam ||
abhyantare208 maṇḍale pam̐ kārapariṇataṃ209 viśvadalakamale210 am̐ kārajaṃ211 pūrṇaśaśimaṇḍalam 
| (ctadupari212 hrīḥ kāram atiprabhāsvaraṃ sphuratkiraṇasamūhaṃ213 vyāptanabhastalaṃ214 vibhāvya 
tatpariṇataṃ svabījagarbhaṃ nālālaṅkṛtaṃ215 vikacakamalaṃ samavalokayet216 | tata etat217 sakalaṃ 
pariṇatam ātmānaṃ218 bhagavantaṃ dhyāyāt219 | himakarakoṭikiraṇavadātaṃ dehaṃ220 smera-
mukhaṃ221 dviraṣṭavarṣadeśīyaṃ222 karuṇāsnigdhāvalokaṇaṃ223 śṛṅgārarasaparyupāsitam atiśāntaṃ sar -
valakṣaṇasaṃpūrṇaṃ c) sarvālakṣaṇavivarjitam224 ekamukhaṃ tapasviveśadharam ūrdhvajaṭāmakuṭam225 
Amitābhakṛtaśekharaṃ divyasuvarṇamāṇikyamuktavaidūryasarvaratnādyābharaṇabhūṣitam | aṣṭa-  
a Compare Harih ariharivāhanodbhavalokeśvarasādhana: yam ̐kāra  niṣp annaṃ vāyu  maṇḍ a laṃ [ …] sumerum 
(Sādhanamālā  34, ed. Bhattacharyya 1925: 78 2–8; Sakuma 2002 No. 9.2).
201. śrīmatpotalakācalodaranivāsinaṃ A śrīmatpotalakāvarodalavirājitaṃ D śrīmatpotarakāvarodananivāsita B 
śrīmatpotalakāvarodara nivāsita C
202. catuḥs
ūtrasamāyutaṃ A catusūtrasamāyutaṃ B≈D catuḥsūtra samāyuktaṃ C
203. paṭṭa
sragdāma- A paṭśragdāma- B paṭṭaśradāma- D patra sragdāma- C
204. vakulikramaśīrṣaparyantaṃ cor r. vakulikakarmaśīrṣaparyyantaṃ A≈B vaktarika karmaśīrṣa paryantaṃ C 
vakulikakarmmasiṣaraparyyaṃtaṃ D
205. vajraratnakhacitakumbhastambhāḥ A vajraratnena ṣacitaṃ kumbhastambha B vajraratnacitaṃ kuṃbhastaṃbhe 
D vajraratna nakhacitaṃ kumbhastambha C
206.  mahāv
ajrakramaśīrṣas corr.  mahāvajrakarmaśīrṣan A mahāvajrakarmmaṇīrṣa B mahāvajrakarmasirṣa CD
207. tu pakṣ
inī B catuḥ pakṣiṇi C pradakṣini D tu pradakṣiṇaṃ A
b Compare Nāgabuddhi’s Viṃśatividhi  4.14 –17, 8.12 (ed. Tanaka 2010) et al.: caturasram catu[r]dvāraṃ … 
ghaṇṭāpatākasaṃśobhaṃ cāmarādivibhūṣitaṃ
208. abhyan
tare corr.  abhyantara- AC atyantare B atentara D
209. paṃkā
ra pariṇataṃ C≈B paṃkārena parinataṃ D pam ̐kārapariṇata A
210. viśva
dalakamale ABD viśvadala kamalaṃ C
211. am̐kāra
jaṃ A aṃkārajaṃ B akārajaṃ CD 
212. tadup
ari D tatopari B tatropari AC
213. sphur
at- C sphūra- AB spharaṇa- D
214. vyāpt
anabhastalaṃ A vyāpta nabhastalaṃ C vyāptanabhastaraṃ B vyāptena hastanaṃ D
215. nālāṅ
kṛtaṃ C nānālaṃkṛtaṃ ABD 
216. vikac
akamalaṃ samavalokayet C vikacanāla samavalokayet A vikacanālasasavalokayan B vikacanālasamavalo -
kayan · D
217. tata et
at A tataḥ etat C tata ye tat B tatra etata D
218. sakal
aṃ parinatam ātmānaṃ B sakalapariṇatam ātmānaṃ A sakala paritaṇata sātmāntraṃ C sakalaparinatam 
ātmānaṃ D
219. dhyāy
āt AC dhyāyā B dhyātvā D
220. dehaṃ A
BC; D omits
221. smera
mukhaṃ C smeramukha A samaramukha B samaramuṣa D
222. -deś
īyaṃ corr.  -deśiyaṃ BC -darśitaṃ A -deśitaṃ D
223. karu
ṇāsnigdhāvalokaṇaṃ corr.  karaṇāsanigdhavalokaṇaṃ B karuṇasasnigdhāvalokana A karuṇāsgigdha vilo -
kanaṃ C karuṇāśrīśavalokanaṃ D
c Compare Padmākaramati’s Khasarpa ṇasādh ana: tatropari hrīḥkāram […] atiśāntaṃ nānālakṣaṇālaṅkṛtam 
(Sādhanamālā 14, ed. Bhattacharyya 1925: 38 15–40 8; Sakuma 2002 No. 2.2).
224. sarvā
lakṣaṇavivarjitaṃ B sarvālakṣaṇavarjitaṃ A≈C sarvalakṣaṇavarjjitaṃ D
225. urdhv
ajaṭāmakuṭaṃ C urujaṭāmakuṭa B urujaṭāmakuṭaṃ C jaṭāmakuṭa A
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   60 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 65] ---
Appendix 2.261
bhujaṃ dakṣiṇe prathamabhujenāmṛtaśravadvaradaṃ226 dvitīyabhujenākṣamālādharaṃ tṛtīyabhuje-
na pāśadharaṃ caturthabhujeṇābhayaratnadharam | vāme227 prathamabhujeṇa sanālasahasradalaka -
maladharaṃ karavigalatpīyūṣadhārāvyavahārarasikaṃ tadadhaḥ228 sūcīmukhaṃ tarpayantaṃ229 dvitī-  
yabhujena Prajñā pustakadharaṃ230 tṛtīyabhujeṇa tridaṇḍadharaṃ231 caturthabhujeṇa kamaṇḍaludharam 
evaṃbhūtaṃ śrīAmoghapāśalokeśvaram232 ātmānaṃ bhāvayet | bhagavataḥ śirasi hrīm̐ kārotpannaṃ233 
raktābhaṃ234 mayūrāsanaṃ Vajradharmam ātmānaṃ235 dhyāyāt236 || 1 ||
tadbahir237 bhagavataḥ purata238 Amoghāṅkuśo raktavarṇa aṅkuśaṃ savyakare dharaṃ239 vāmakare 
pāśadharam || 2 ||
(dbhagavato dakṣiṇe Tārā śyāmā vāmakaravidhṛtaṃ sanālam utpalaṃ240 dakṣiṇakareṇa vikāśayanti241 
nānālaṃkāravatī abhinavayauvanodbhinnakucabhārā242 || 3 ||
Agnau243 Sudhanakumāraś ca kṛtāñjalipuṭaḥ kanakāvabhāsadyutiḥ kumārarūpadhārī244 vāmakakṣe 
vinyastapustakaḥ245 sakalālaṅkāravān246 || 4 ||
vāme Bhṛkuṭī caturbhujā hemaprabhā jaṭākalāpinī247 vāme tridaṇḍakamaṇḍaludhārī248 hastā dakṣiṇe 
vandanābhiṇayākṣasūtradharā karā249 trinetrā || 5 ||
226. dakṣiṇe prathamabhujenāmṛtaśravadvaradaṃ em . dakṣ iṇa prathama bhūjonāmṛta suvat varadaṃ C dahinaprat -
hamabhujenāmṛtaśravatvaradaṃ Bac dahinaprathamabhujenāmṛtasravadvaradaṃ A dakṣine prathamabhujenāmṛtaśeva tˎ 
varadaṃ D
227. vāme C vā
ma- ABD
228. karavigatapīyūṣadhārāvyavahārarasikaṃ tadadho A karavigatapīyuṣadhārāvyavahārarasikatadadha· B kara 
vigalat pīyuṣa dhārābhya vahāra rasikaṃ C karavigatapiyuṣadhārāvevahāre rasikatadadha D
229. sūcīm
ukhaṃ tarpayantaṃ C; ABD omit. (All of the expression pertaining to the sūcīmukha here is misplaced 
and should apply to the first right hand, not the first left hand.)
230. prajñā
pustakadharaṃ AD pustakadharaṃ Bac≈C
231. trida
ṇḍadharaṃ ABC triśuladharaṃ D
232. śrīam
oghapāśalokeśvaram B≈C śrīamoghapāsalokyaśvaram D śrīlokeśvaram A
233. hrīm̐- BC h
rīḥ- AD
234. raktā
bhaṃ A; BCD omit
235. vajra
dharmam ātmānaṃ bhagavantaṃ B vajradharmam ātmānaṃ bhagavaṃta D vajradharmaṃ bhagavantaṃ 
C bhagavantaṃ vajradharmam ātmānaṃ A
236. dhyāy
āt BCD dhyāyet A
237. tadbah
ir corr.  tadvahi ACD tadā hi B
238. bhagav
ataḥ purato corr.  bhagavato purato B bhagavatī purataḥ C bhavaṃto D bhagavana A
239. aṅkuś
aṃ savyakare dharaṃ corr.  aṃkuśasavyakare dharaṃ A aṃkuśa savye kare dharaṃ· Bac kusasavyakarad -
hara D savyakareṇa aṅkuśadharaṃ C
240.  vāmak
amaladhṛtaṃ sanālam utpalaṃ B vāmakaradhṛta sarotpaṃna· D vāmakamaladhṛta sanāla mutpālaṃ C 
vāmakaravidhṛtasanālam utpala A
241. vikāś
ayanti B vikāsayantīṃ C savikāśayantī A savikāsayaṃti D
242. abhina
vayauvanodbhinnakucabhārā em. abhina yaivanodbhannakucabhārā C abhinavayauvanā yauvanodbhin -
nakucabhārā A abhinavayauvanā yauvanndbhinnakuvabhārā B abhinavayo vanā hinakucabhālā D
243. agnau A a
gnaye C agne B agni· D
244.  kumāra
rūpadhārī A kūmararūpa dhāri C kumārarūpadhāriḥ D kumārarūpadharo B
245. vāmak
akṣe vinyastapustaka A vāmakaṣavinyastaka B vāmakara kṣavinyasta C vāmakakṣaviveśta D
246. sakalāl
aṃkāravān AC sakalālakṛtatanāt B kamakalālaṃkṛtavān D
247. jaṭāk
alāpinī A jaṭākalāpanī C jaṭākalaṃpinī B jaṭakalpinā D
248. trida
ṇḍakamaṇḍaludhārī BCD tridaṇḍī kamaṇḍaludhārī A
249. vanda
nābhiṇayākṣasūtradharakarā BC vadanābhinaṃ akṣasutradharā· D varadābhinayākṣasūtradharakarā A
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   61 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 66] ---
Iain Sinclair62
Īśāne Hayagrīvo raktavarṇaḥ kharvalambodara ūrdhvajvalatpiṅgalakeśo bhujaṅgayajñopavītī250  
kapilataraśmaśruśrenīparicitamukhamaṇḍalo251 raktavartulatrinetro bhṛkuṭīkuṭilabhrūko vyāghracar -
māmbaraḥ252 | daṇḍāyudho dakṣiṇakareṇa253 vandanābhinayī || 6 ||d)
*
(etadbāhyāṣṭadalapadme254 Maitreyādīn vinyāset255 | Maitreyaḥ pītavarṇo256 nāgapuṣpavarapradaḥ || 
7 || Kṣitigarbho dakṣiṇe śyāmavarṇaḥ kalaśaṃ cābhayaṃ tathā257 || 8 || paścime Vajrapāṇiḥ śuklābho 
vajrahastavarapradaḥ258 || 9 || uttare Khagarbhaḥ śyāmābhaś259 cintāmaṇivarapradaḥ260 || 10 || Agnau261 
Mañjughoṣaḥ kanakābhaḥ262 khaḍgapustakadharaḥ263 || 11 || Nairṛtye Gaganagañjo raktavarṇo nīlotpala-
varapradaḥ || 12  || Vāyavye Viṣkambhī tuṣāravarṇo ratnottamavarapradaḥ || 13  || Īśāne Samantabhadraḥ 
pītābho raktotpalavarapradaḥ264 || 14  ||e) 
(ftadbāhye Vahnyādicatuṣkoṇe265 | Agnau266 Puṣpā śuklā puṣpamālācakradhāriṇī267 vāmetarakarā268 
|| 15 || Nairṛtye269 Dhūpā dhūmravarṇā dhūpakaṭacchuratnagrāhī vāmetarakarā270 || 16  || Vāyavye271 
Dīpā kanakavarṇā272 dīpayaṣṭipadmavāmasavyahastā273 || 17  || Aiśāne274 Gandhā raktā gandhaśaṅkha -
khaḍgadhāriṇī275 vāmetarabhujā || 18  ||f)
250. bhujaṅgayajñopavītī bhujaṃgayajñopavīti A≈B bhūjaṃgayajñopavitī bhujagayajñāpāpati D
251. kapilataraśmaśruśroniparicittamukhamaṇḍalam B kapilataraśmaśruḥ śreṇīparicittamukhamaṇḍalo A kapilatara 
śmaśnuśreṇī paricittamukhamaṇḍalam C kapilataraśmaśruśrenīparicitamuṣamandula D
252. vyāghra
carmāmbaraḥ A≈CD vyāghracarmāvaraḥ B
253. dakṣi
ṇakareṇa AB dakṣiṇeṇa C dakṣine karṇṇa D
d Compare Padmākaramati’s Khasarpa ṇasādh ana: tasya puratas tārā […] daṇḍāyudhaḥ dakṣiṇa  kareṇ a vandanā -
bhinay
ī (Sādhanamālā  14, ed. Bhattacharyya 1925: 40 9–41 4; cf. Sakuma 2002 No. 2.2).
254. tadbāh
yāṣṭadalapadme AC tadbāhyāṣṭadale padme B tadvāhyāṣṭadme D
255. maitr
īyādīn vinyāset C maitrayādivirasat B maitri āvineset· D; A omits
256. maitr
eyaḥ pītavarṇo corr.  maitreyaḥ pītavarṇā A metreya pītavarṇṇābhā B maitreya pītavarṇe C maitriyapita -
parṇṇā D
257. cābha
yaṃ tathā AB cābhaya tathā D vāmeya tathā C 
258. vajra
hastapradaḥ em. vajrahastau varaprada C vajrāṃkuśavarapradaḥ A vajrāṃkuśavarapradaṃ B vajrakṣada -
napadaṃ D 
259. śyām
ābhaś corr.  śyāmābhā B śyāmābho C syāmavarṇṇa D śyāmaś A 
260.  cintā
maṇivarapradaḥ A cintāv manivalapradaḥ B cintāmaṇivaraprada C ciṃtāmaṇivalapradāṃ D
261. agnau A a
gnaya B āgnayai C agni D
262. kanak
ābhaḥ C kanakābhaṃ B kanakābhaḥ C kanakavarṇṇa D
263. khadg
apustakadharaḥ A khaḍga pustaka dhārakaḥ C khaḍgapustakadhāriṇaṃ B ṣaḍgapustakadhāranaṃ D
264. raktot
palavarapradaḥ BC ratnotpaladharapradaḥ A ratnotpalavaradaṃ D 
e Compare the anonymous Lokanāthasādhana: tadvaraṭakāṣṭadale padme maitreyādiṃ ca vinyaset [...] samant -
abhadraḥ pītābho ratnotpalavarapradaḥ ( Sādhanamālā  18, ed. Bhattacharyya 1925: 49 11–50 2; cf. Sakuma 2002 No. 1.2).
265. tadbā
hye vahnyādicatuṣkoṇe corr.  tadbāhyavahnyādicatukoṇe BC tadbāhye catuṣkoṇe A tadbāhe catukone D
266. agnau A
; BCD omit
267. cakra d
hāriṇī C cakradhārī ABD
268. vāmet
arakarā BCD vāmetarahastā A
269. naiṛtye
 AC naiṛtyāṃ B naiṛtyā D
270. vāmet
arakarā A vāmatarahastā B vāme tarahastā C vāmakarahastā D
271. vāyav
ye AC vāyuvyāṃ BD
272. kanak
avarṇā ABC; D omits
273. dīpaya
ṣṭipadmavāmasavyahastā AC dīpayaṣṭipadmavāmasavye haste B dipāvāmatālabhujā· D
274. aiśān
e A aiśānyāṃ B īśāne C aiśānyā D
275. gandha
śaṃkhakhaḍgadhāriṇī C gaṃdhaśaṣakharḍgadhāri D gaṃndhaśaṃkhadhārī AB
f Compare the Śrīsaṃpuṭatantroktavajrasattvamaṇḍala of Abhayākaragupta’s Niṣpannayogāvalī : tat o bāhya-
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   62 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 67] ---
Appendix 2.263
tadbāhye276 |
pūrvadvāre karābhyāṃ tu vajrāṅkuśasamarpitaḥ |
jaḥkārabījasaṃjāto277 Vajrāṅkuśaḥ278 sitadyutiḥ || 19 ||
hūm̐ kārabījasaṃbhūto dakṣiṇadvārasaṃsthitaḥ |
nīlavarṇaprabho ’sau279 tu hastābhyāṃ Vajrapāśabhṛt280 || 20 ||
vam̐ kārabījaniṣpanno Vajrasphoṭārkasamaprabhaḥ281 |
hastābhyāṃ śṛṅkhalā gṛhya282 paścimadvārasaṃsthitaḥ || 21 ||
hoḥ kārabījanirjāto Vajrāveśas tu uttare |
vajraghaṇṭāṃ susaṃgṛhya283 viśvavarṇo mahādyutiḥ |
padmasthacandrabimbe ca sattvaparyaṅkasaṃsthitaḥ || 22 ||
(gtadbāhye ’ṣṭāracakre284 | tatra prācyāṃ śubhraAirāvatārūḍho285 vajradhara Indraḥ || 23  || avācyāṃ 
mahiṣārūḍhaḥ kṛṣṇo daṇḍadharo Y amaḥ286 || 24  || pratīcyāṃ makarārūḍhaḥ śvetaḥ saptaphaṇo287 
nāgapāśaśaṅkhabhṛd Varuṇaḥ || 25  || udīcyāṃ naravāhanaḥ pīta aṅkuśagadādharaḥ288 Kuberaḥ || 26  || 
vidikṣu catvāraḥ | tata289 Agnau290 chāgārūḍho raktaḥ sruvakamaṇḍaludhara291 Agniḥ292 || 27  || Nairṛ-
tye śavārūḍho nīlaḥ khaḍgapheṭakadharo293 rakṣasādhipo Nairṛtiḥ294 || 28  || Vāyavye295 mṛgavāhano nīlo 
vātapaṭadharo Vāyuḥ296 || 29  || Aiśāne297 vṛṣabhārūḍhaḥ298 sitaḥ triśūlakapālapāṇir Īśānaḥ299 || 30  ||g)
paṭṭikāyām āgneyāṃ puṣpā śuklā puṣpamālācakradhārīvāmetarabhujā [...] aiśānyāṃ gandhā raktā gandhaśaṅkha -
khaḍgadhārīvametarakarā (ed. Lee 2004: 15–16).
276. tadbā
hye A tadvāhe D; BC omit
277. jaḥkā
rabījasaṃjāto A jaṃkārabījasaṃ bhūtā B jaṃkāra vīja saṃbhūto C jaṃkāravijamaṃjātā D
278. vajrāṃ
kuśaḥ A vajrāṃkuśa BCD
279. nīlav
arṇa prabho’sau C nīlavarṇaprabhā sau A nīlavarṇṇaprabho sau B nīlavarṇṇaprabhā amo D
280. vajra
pāśabhṛt A vajraghaṇṭhabhṛt BCD
281. vajrā
sphoṭārkka samprabhaḥ C vajrasphoṭārkasamaprabhaṃ AD vajrasphoṭasamaprabhaḥ B
282. śṛṃkh
alā gṛhya AB śṛṃkhalāṃdhṛtvā C śṛkharā gṛhā D
283. vajra
ghaṇṭāṃ susaṃgṛhya A ghaṇṭhāsaṃgṛhya B ghaṇṭhāṃ saṃgṛhya C ghaṇṭhā saṃgṛhahastāṃbhyā D
284. tadbā
hyāṣṭāracakre ABC tadbāhe aṣṭaracakraṃḥ· D
285. śubhr
a-airāvaṇārūḍho A sūtrair āvaṇārūḍho B airāvatārūḍho C śutairāvanārudhā D
286. kṛṣṇo d
aṇḍadharo yamaḥ AC kṛṣṇā daṇḍadharā jama B kṛṣṇa daṃdadharā yamaḥ D
287. śveta
ḥ saptaphaṇo A śvetasaptaphanā ABD
288. pīta aṃku
śagadādharaḥ A pītāṃkuśagaḍādhara BC pītāṃkusaṃ gadādharaṃ D
289. vidik
ṣu catvāraḥ || tato B≈D tataḥ C; A omits
290. agnau A ’
gneyā B āgnaye A agnayāṃ D
291. rakta
ḥ sruvakamaṇḍaludhara em . raktasrūvā kamaṇḍarūdharo C raktasūtrakamaṇḍaludhara A raktaśūtraka -
maṇḍaludharā B raktasūtrakamaṃḍaludharāṃ D
292. agniḥ A a
gni B agnauḥ D; A omits
293. nīlaḥ k
haḍgapheṭakadharo A≈C nīlakhaḍgapheṭakadharā B nilakhajephatakadharā D
294. rakṣasā
dhipo naiṛtyaḥ A rakstasādhipo naiṛtya B rākṣasādhipa C rākṣasādhipā·naiṛtyaḥ D
295. vāyav
ye A vāyuvyāṃ B vāyave C vāyuvyā D
296. nīlo v
ātapaṭadharo A nīlāvātapatadharā vāyu B haritavarṇa vātapaṭa dharo vāyuḥ C nīlāvātayatadharāḥ vāyu D
297. aiśān
e A īśānyāṃ B īśānāṃ C īśānyāṃ D
298. vṛṣab
hārūḍhaḥ A vṛṣabhārūḍho B vṛṣamārūḍhaḥ sitaḥ C vṛkhabhārudhā D
299. sitaḥ
 triśūlakapālapāṇir īśānaḥ A≈B sitaḥ triśūla kapāla pāṇiḥ C śītatriśūlakapālapāsi·īśāne D
g Compare the Dharmadhātuvāgīśvaramaṇḍala of Abhayākaragupta’s Niṣpannayogāvalī:  …aind ryāṃ diśi śubhrai -
rāvatārūḍha indraḥ pīto vajraṃ stanaṃ ca dadhānaḥ […] aiśānyāṃ vṛṣabhārūḍha īśānaḥ sitaḥ triśūlakapālapāṇiḥ […] 
vāyavyāṃ mṛge vāyur nīlo vātapaṭadharaḥ (ed. Lee 2004: 74–75).
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   63 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 68] ---
Iain Sinclair64
ete sarve ekavaktrāḥ300 svanāyakānanapreritadṛṣṭayo301 yathāśobham avasthitāś302 cintanīyaḥ | evaṃ-
bhūtaṃ samāṇḍaleyaṃ bhāvayet303 ||
iti Maṇḍalarājāgrī nāma dvitīyo samādhiḥ304 ||
Translation
Next is the concentrated state called Maṇḍalarājāgrī. 
Now, having cultivated the four Brahmic states—friendliness, com  passion, delig
ht, equanimity—
[repeat]:
om̐ , all dharmas are inherently pure, i am inherently pure. i have the inherent nature of 
the vajra of knowledge of emptiness.
Then, emanated by means of the syllable yam ̐ , is a bow-shaped wind ma ṇḍala m arked with a blue flag; 
on top of it, arising from a ra[m ̐ ], a red fire ma ṇḍala, t
riangular, marked with a red ra glyph; above that, 
transformed from the syllable vam ̐ , a water ma ṇḍala, r
ound, clear in colour, marked with a white bell; 
above that, arising from the syllable lam ̐ , an earthen ma ṇḍala, f
our-sided, yellow, blazoned with yellow 
three-pronged vajras in the four corners; above that, emanated from the syllable sum ̐ , Sumeru, made of 
four jewels, boasting eight peaks underneath. The residence, the crystalline cavern of blessed Potalaka 
mountain, is a pagoda adorned [with] four doors [and] four tympana, having sun-and-moon emblems at 
all four corners of the points of contact between the doorway and the pediments (niryūha ) and decorated 
with pearl and half-pearl [strings], enclosed by four cords, beautified by banners and streamers, girded 
by piping and parapets, the vase-capital columns studded with vajra gems. Also, the sides have a great 
vajra parapet festooned with a net of tinklebells. [The ma ṇḍala] i
s adorned with eight flagstaffs, is well 
decorated with yaktail fans; the sun outside is in the correct place. 
In the internal ma ṇḍala t
ransformed from the syllable paṃ , upon a lotus with all-spreading petals, 
is the full moon ma ṇḍala g
enerated from the syllable am ̐ . Having visualized upon it the syllable hrīḥ, 
extremely bright, [its] concentration of shimmering rays pervading the sky, he should look upon the 
nucleus of his syllable changed into an outspread lotus adorned with a stalk. Then he should imagine all of 
that transformed into the persona of the Bhagavat. His body the dazzling white of a crore of snow-glints, 
he has a smiling face, about twice eight years [old], looking compassionate and affectionate, attended by 
passionate sentiment, most peaceful, complete with all [auspicious] marks, bereft of all non-[auspicious] 
marks, single-faced, wearing ascetic garb; having a crown of piled-up locks, Amitābha is fashioned in 
the crest; he is adorned with divine ornaments of gold, ruby, pearl, lapis and jewels of all kinds. He is 
eight-armed, on the right [side] bestowing a stream of ambrosia with the first hand, holding a rosary 
with the second hand, holding a noose with the third hand, holding the jewel of unfear with the fourth 
hand; on the left, holding a thousand-petalled lotus with stalk with the first hand, with the second hand 
satiating the needlemouthed [preta ] below him tasting the to-and-fro of the stream of downpouring nectar, 
holding a book of the Prajñā  with the third hand, holding a waterpot with the fourth hand—in this way 
should he conceive the persona of the blessed Infallible Noose (Amoghapāśa), the glorious Lokeśvara. 
300. ete sarve ekavaktrāḥ A ete sarvva evaṃ B ete sarve eva C te sarva yakavaktrā D
301. svanāyakānanaprerita dṛṣṭayo C svanāyakānanaparittadṛṣṭayo A svanāyakānanapreritadṛṣṭaḥ yo B paritadṛṣṭo yo D
302. yathāśobham avasthitāś B yathāśobhavasthitāś A yathā śobhana vasthitāś C yathāśobham avasthitā D
303. bhāvayet A bhāvayat D bhāvayet || pūrvavat puṣpaṃ nyāśa || ām ̐ pām̐ pum̐ pam̐ lām̐ gham̐ stum̐  tam̐  || B bhāvayet || ā·  
pā· pū· paṃ· lā· ghaṃ· stuti || C
304. maṇḍalarājāgrī nāma dvitīyo samādhiḥ em
. maṇḍalarājā dvitīya samādhiḥ A maṇḍalarājagrī nāma dvitīya yoga 
samādhiḥ C maṇḍalogrī nāma dvitīyayogasamādhiḥ B maṃdalarājaśrīnāmasamādhiḥ D
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   64 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 69] ---
Appendix 2.265
He should think that the persona of Vajradharma, red in colour, seated on a peacock, is emanated from 
a hrīm ̐  syllable on the Bhagavat’s crest. (1)
On his outside, in front of the Bhagavat, is Amoghāṅkuśa, red in colour, a hook held in his right hand, 
holding a noose in his left. (2)
On the Bhagavat’s right is Tārā, dark [green], in the left hand grasping with the stalk a blue waterlily 
being opened up with the right hand. [She is] replete with a variety of jewelry, bearing breasts of freshest 
youth. (3)
And in the southeast is prince Sudhana, cupping [his hands] in salutation; a book tucked under his left 
arm, he has the lustrous sheen of gold, maintaining the appearance of a prince laden with all ornaments. (4)
On the left is Bhṛkuṭī, four-armed, of golden aura, her locks fanned out, holding in hand a triple staff 
and waterpot on the right, the arms on the left waving in greeting and holding a seed rosary. [She is] 
three-eyed. (5)
In the northeast is Hayagrīva, red in colour, squat and potbellied, having flamelike orange hair, an 
anaconda for a sacred thread, tawny facial hair lined around the circle of his mouth, three round red 
eyes, frown-furrowed brows, and a tiger-pelt garment. Armed with a club in his right hand, he waves in 
greeting. (6)
On the eight-petalled lotus outside of that one should situate Maitreya and so on. Maitreya, yellow in 
colour, presents a nāga flower and the giving [gesture] (7 ), and Kṣitigarbha, in the South, dark-coloured, 
a vase and unfearing (8 ). In the West, Vajrapāṇi, white-hued, presents a vajra in his hand and the giving 
[gesture] (9 ). In the north, Khagarbha, dark-hued, presents a wishing gem and the giving [gesture] (10 ). 
In the Southeast, Mañjughoṣa, golden-hued, holds a sword and book (11 ). In the Southwest, Gaganagañ-
ja, red-coloured, presents a blue waterlily and the giving [gesture] (12 ). In the Northwest, Viṣkambhin, 
frost-coloured, presents a jewel aloft and the giving [gesture] (13 ). In the Northeast, Samantabhadra, 
yellow-hued, presents a lotus and the giving [gesture] (14 ).
In the four corners outside of that, starting with the Southeast, is Puṣpā, white, holding a circular 
flower wreath in her left and right hands (15 ). In the Southwest is Dhūpā, smoky-coloured, holding an 
incense burner in her left and right hands (16 ). In the Northwest is Dīpā, golden-coloured, holding a 
lamp wick and lotus in her left and right hands (17 ). In the Northeast is Gandhā, red, holding a perfume 
conch and sword in her left and right hands (18 ).
Outside of that, at the eastern doorway, holding a vajra-pommel goad in both hands, arising from 
the syllable jaḥ, is Vajrāṅkuśa, bright white (19 ). Staying in the southern doorway, born from the syl-
lable hūm̐ , radiating dark blue, is he who holds the Vajrapāśa in both hands (20 ). Emanated from the 
syllable va m̐  is Vajrasphoṭa, the same colour as the sun, holding shackles with both hands, staying at 
the western doorway (21 ). Springing forth then from the syllable hoḥ  is Vajrāveśa in the north, nicely 
holding a vajra bell, multicoloured, very bright, sitting in sattvaparyaṅka in a moon disc upon a lotus (22 ).
On the eight-spoked wheel outside of that, in its eastern [sector], is Indra the vajra holder, riding 
bright white Airāvata (23 ). In the southern [sector] is Yama the truncheon-holder, black, riding a water 
buffalo (24 ). In the western [sector] is Varuṇa, seven-hooded, bearing a serpentine noose and a conch, 
riding a sea monster (25 ). In the northern [sector] is Kubera, holding a hook and a mace, yellow, riding 
a man (26 ). 
Then, in the four ordinal directions, is Agni in the Southeast, red, riding a goat, holding a ladle and 
waterpot (27 ); Nairṛti in the Southwest, dark blue, riding a corpse, holding a sword and shield, a ruler 
of ogres (28 ); Vāyu in the Northwest, dark blue, riding a deer, holding a sail (29 ); Īśāna in the Northeast, 
white, riding a bull, trident and skull in hand (30 ).
02_CreSouthV1_8P_4Feb22.indd   65 3/2/22   6:16 PM

--- [Page 70] ---
Chapter 3
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774):  
Southern Indian Artistic Mode in Tang China
and its Transmission to Tibet1
introduction
As a starting point, this research analyses 
the imagery in a distinctive Indian artis -
tic mode2 found in various paintings from 
Mogao and Yulin caves.3 The material under review 
belongs to the 8th to 11th century and often features 
1. This is a revised version of the article ‘Uncovering 
Amoghavajra’s Legacy in the Hexi Corridor and Tibet’ that 
was initially published in Journal of Tibetology 21 (2019). 
It expands on a talk given at the Seventh International 
Conference on Tibetan Archaeology & Arts in Chengdu, 
October 2018. Many people helped me in various stages 
of preparing it. I would like to thank in particular Tristan 
Bruck, Analicia Busha, Geoffrey Goble, Shawo Khacham, 
Rory Lindsay and Darik Thokmay for their assistance with 
my studies on the topics discussed in this chapter; and Em -
manuel Francis, Yuko Fukuroi, Amy Heller, Deepanjana 
Klein, Arno Klein and Nicolas Revire for sharing with me 
images from their photographic archives. I am immense -
ly grateful to Andrea Acri, Claudine Bautze-Picron, Rolf 
Giebel, Yannick Laurent, Robert Mayer, Neil Schmid, Per 
Sørensen, Jeffrey Sundberg, Joie Szu-Chiao Chen, Charles 
Orzech, Sam van Schaik, Peter Sharrock, Zhang Chang -
hong, Dorothy Wong and several anonymous reviewers, 
who read my manuscript, corrected the errors and offered 
me their extremely valuable feedback. All remaining errors 
are of course my own. [The editors wish to thank Yannick 
Laurent for his assistance in editing this chapter, published 
posthumously]
2. The term ‘
artistic mode’ is used as a broader category 
than artistic style and refers to a general way of representa -
tion. Additionally, ‘imagery in an Indian artistic mode’ 
refers to Indianized images that were made to look as if 
they were Indian as opposed to images in a traditional local 
artistic mode, which for the area discussed in this chapter 
is Chinese.
3. A list of t
hese paintings can be found in Appendix 3.1.yury khokhlov
Esoteric Buddhist imagery.4 Since some of the early 
examples within this group belong to the period of the Tibetan occupation of the Hexi Corridor,
5 
their artistic mode has often been ascribed—er -
roneously, in my view—to the cultural influence 
of Tibet. Several recent publications on this topic 
provoked me to address the issues that I see in such 
attributions.6 Contrary to this common opinion, I 
will argue that this artistic mode is, in fact, influ -
enced by Southern Indian7 art and, in particular, 
4. The term ‘Esoteric Buddhism’ is notoriously complex 
and pr
oblematic; in this chapter it is used mostly as a ref -
erence to teachings that were introduced to China during 
the Tang and possessed instructions in the use of mantra , 
dhāraṇī , and  maṇḍala . ‘E
soteric Buddhist imagery’ refers 
here to representations of deities associated with these 
teachings. An extensive discussion on the term ‘Esoteric 
Buddhism’ can be found in Orzech, Sørensen, and Payne 
2011: 3–18. 
5. In this a
rticle, I adopted the dates of the Tibetan con -
quest of the Hexi Corridor from van Schaik and Galambos 
2012: 62–63. Guazhou (Ch. 瓜州 , the prefecture where the 
Yulin caves are located), was captured by the Tibetans in 
776, while Shazhou (Ch. 沙州 , the prefecture containing 
Dunhuang) fell in 786. After the collapse of the Tibetan 
empire, the whole Hexi Corridor was once again under 
Chinese rule by 851.
6. Recent publications that argue for the Tibetan origin of 
the discussed imagery include Kapstein 2004, 2009, 2014; 
Sha 2013; McCoy 2016; Wang 2018; Debreczeny 2019. See 
fns. 54, 138, 143 for details.
7. Geographically, the Indian subcontinent has been 
divided into the Northern and Southern parts. While the 
Northern part includes the northern mountains and the 
Indo-Gangetic plains, the Southern part is comprised of 
the Indian Peninsula. Southern India is a geographical 
designation, which should not be confused with South 
India, which, in modern administrative terms, includes the 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   66 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 71] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 67
Map 3.1: Major land and maritime routes between South and East Asia in the first millennium CE and sites 
mentioned in the article (based on a map from https://en.unesco.org/silkroad/about-silk-roads#pid=1, with the 
permission of UNESCO).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   67 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 72] ---
Yury Khokhlov68
certain stylistic and iconographic features can be 
traced exclusively to the art of the Pallava kingdom 
in Tamil Nadu and the Pallava influenced art of the 
Western Deccan, thereby ruling out alleged artistic 
influences from Tibet. Moreover, the discussed 
images are closely affiliated with teachings intro -
duced to China by Vajrabodhi (or Vajrabuddhi, Ch. 
金剛智 , 671–741) in the first half of the 8th century 
and specifically propagated in Hexi by Amogha -
vajra (Ch. 不空  Bukong, 705–774) in the mid-8th 
century. Thus, the presence of such depictions in 
artwork from the Tibetan period merely signifies 
the continuation and Tibetan appropriation of the 
artistic and religious trends that existed in Hexi 
before the Tibetan conquest. Furthermore, it will 
be shown that this artistic mode was transmitted 
to Central Tibet during the Tibetan occupation 
of the Hexi Corridor and can be recognized in 
sculptures from a number of early Central Tibetan 
temples. I argue that this artistic transmission was 
a result of significant religious transmission, which 
included, but was likely not limited to, the cult of 
Vairocana and the eight great bodhisattvas, as well 
as the teachings of the Yoga tradition (i.e. Yoga-  
tantras according to the Tibetan classification).
This article is divided into four major parts.  
Part 1 presents a brief historical overview of Bud-
dhism and artistic trends in Hexi before the Tibetan 
conquest. Part 2 discusses the most representative 
area encompassing the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Telangana as well as 
the union territories  Andaman, Nicobar, Lakshadweep , 
and Puducherry .
  An imaginary division line between the two parts 
goes along the Vindhya Mountains and the Satpura Range, 
which separate the Gangetic plains and the Deccan plateau 
(see Map 3.1, where it is shown as a black dashed line). The 
two parts of the subcontinent, being interconnected on 
many levels, are, nevertheless, characterized by different 
histories, economies and cultures, and often by distinctive 
artistic styles. See Thapar 2003: 37–68. There is yet another 
distinction which is particularly important for this research. 
While the cultural influence of Northern India mostly 
spread along land-bound trade routes, Southern Indian 
influence is mostly noticeable in territories with which 
Southern Indian polities engaged in sea trade. From this 
perspective, landlocked Tibet belongs to the Northern 
Indian sphere of influence, while China was naturally pre -
disposed to receive influence from both Northern and 
Southern parts of India.depictions within this group of materials and their 
connection to Southern Indian art and Amogha -
vajra’s textual heritage. In Part 3, I will provide an 
overview of Southern Indian influence on Buddhist 
art in China in general and situate this Hexi group 
of images within a larger picture. In Part 4, I will 
argue that the artistic mode under review and its 
corresponding teachings were transmitted from 
Hexi to Tibet during the period of Tibetan occupa-
tion. Major sites mentioned in the article are shown 
in Map 3.1, which also illustrates major land and 
maritime routes between South and East Asia in 
the first millennium CE.8
part 1. historical setting
By the Han dynasty (206 BC–220  CE), the Hexi 
Corridor was already a strategic part of the Silk 
Road and a gateway to China for those travelling 
from India and Central Asia. This area was an early 
recipient of Buddhist teachings and artistic styles 
arriving to China from the West. Frequent contacts 
with the West led to a highly cosmopolitan Bud -
dhist culture that encouraged a close imitation of 
foreign artistic models. Imperial Buddhist patron-
age and expansion of the Tang dynasty to the West 
in the Tarim Basin created a steady traffic of monks 
travelling between China and Northern India 
through Hexi. Indian monks travelling to China 
and Chinese monks returning to China from India 
often carried with them Buddhist texts and imagery 
as tribute to the court. This process resulted in 
rapid transmission of the newest—and increasingly  
Esoteric—teachings and in the popularity of Indian 
icons and Indianized styles in China, and, in  
particular, in the Hexi Corridor (Dunhuang).9
Whereas the cultural influence of Northern 
India mostly spread along land-bound trade routes, 
including those known as the Silk Road, the impact 
of Southern Indian culture is mostly noticeable 
in territories with which Southern Indian polities 
8. Routes on the Tibetan plateau are not shown in the 
map.
9. The most recent and comprehensive research on travel -
ling monks as agents of religious and artistic transmission 
from India to China is in Wong 2018. On Esoteric Bud -
dhism in Dunhuang and depictions of Esoteric deities in 
Dunhuang art during the Tang, see Schmid 2011.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   68 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 73] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 69
engaged in sea trade. Recent scholarship has rec -
ognized that maritime relations played an equally 
important role in the spread of Buddhist ideas and 
artistic styles.10 
Perhaps one of the most important maritime 
Buddhist imports to Tang China was the Jin’gang-
ding Yoga  (Ch.  金剛頂瑜伽  Jin’gangding yuqie ; 
lit. the Y oga of Adamantine-Crown)11 teachings 
from Southern India. This tantric system includes 
eighteen texts, out of which only the Sarvatathāga -
tatattvasaṅgrahatantra (STTS ),12 also known as the 
Vajraśekharasūtra , was transmitted to China during 
the Tang dynasty. The tradition based on the STTS  
(hereafter the Y oga tradition) became the founda-
tion for a Buddhism of national protection in China 
in the second half of the 8th century.13 Propagation 
of the Y oga tradition in China is attributed to the 
activities of the Indian monk Vajrabodhi14 and his 
pupil Amoghavajra.15 It is maintained that Vajrabo-
dhi studied the Jingangding Y oga under Nāgabo -
dhi/Nāgabuddhi in Southern India, most likely at 
Kāñcīpuram,16 the capital of the Pallava Kingdom 
and a great centre of religious and Sanskrit learning 
equal almost to Nālandā.17 It is said that Nāgabodhi 
in turn was a disciple of Nāgārjuna, who is also be-
lieved to be from Kāñcīpuram,18 and who according 
to legend obtained the Jingangding Yoga  teachings 
from an ‘iron stūpa’ , which was probably located in 
10. On the spread of Buddhism through maritime net -
works, see Acri 2016, 2018.
11. These te
achings are also known under the name Va -
jraśekhara . In addition, Rolf Giebel argues that Vajroṣ ṇīṣa 
is a correct Sanskrit reconstruction of the Chinese title 金
剛頂瑜伽 , see Giebel 1995: 109. 
12. On the STTS  and it s English translation, see  
Giebel 2001.
13. Yang 2018: 120–158. On the notion of National Protec-
tion Buddhism in Tang China, see Orzech 1998: 1–9, 135–209.
14. On Vajrabodhi, see Sundberg and Giebel 2011.
15. On Amog
havajra and his teachings, see Chou 1945: 
284–307; Goble 2012; Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 2011: 
263–285; Yang 2018.
16. Sundb
erg and Giebel 2011: 151
17. On Kāñcīpuram, see Thapar 2003: 344. Lokesh 
Chan
dra even suggested Kāñcīpuram as the location  
of Uḍḍiyāna, see Lokesh Chandra 1980. On the other pos -
sible locations of Uḍḍiyāna, see Sanderson 2007: 265 and 
chapter 3 in Vol. 2 of this publication.
18. Sundb
erg and Giebel 2011: 195, n. 110.Tamil Nadu or Andra Pradesh.19 Vajrabodhi was 
famed as a great Esoteric master and performer of 
miraculous deeds, and before travelling to China 
he was active at the Pallava court in Kāñcīpuram.20 
The core territory of the Pallava Kingdom 
roughly corresponds to the modern-day state of 
Tamil Nadu. The Pallavas were a major military 
and cultural power in the Peninsula and Tamil 
merchants historically played a key role in mari -
time commerce with Southeast Asia and China.21 
In the late 7 th and early 8 th centuries, the Pallavas’ 
relations with China in particular strengthened and 
it is recorded that the two states exchanged several 
diplomatic missions.22 The Pallava king Narasiṃha-
varman II (r. 700 –728 ) is credited with building a 
Buddhist temple in the Chinese style at the port city 
of Nāgapaṭṭinam for Chinese Buddhists arriving by 
sea.23 On the Southern Chinese shore, three temples 
(Brahmanic or Buddhist) for Tamil merchants were 
erected in the port city of Guangzhou (Ch. 廣州 ) in 
the 8th century or even earlier.24 Xuanzang (Ch. 玄
奘) visited Kāñcīpuram by land routes in the early 
7th century and reported the presence of about 100 
Buddhist temples and 10,000  Buddhist monks.25
Intent on propagating Buddhism in China, 
Vajrabodhi joined a Pallava diplomatic mission 
and travelled to the Tang court as an envoy of 
the Pallava king. Navigating along established sea 
routes through Sri Lanka and Sumatra, the mission 
arrived at Guangzhou, from whence they reached 
Luoyang (Ch. 洛陽 ) in the year 720 . Vajrabodhi 
brought to China various Buddhist texts, including 
a short version of the Jingangding Yoga  scripture  
19. The story of ‘iron stūpa’ is found in Amoghavajra’s 
‘Instructions on the Gate to the Teaching of the Secret Heart 
of the Great Yoga of the Scripture of the Diamond Summit’ (
金剛頂經大瑜伽秘密心地法門義訣  Jin’gangding jing da yuqie 
mimi xindi famen yijue , T 1798 39: 808 a19–b28). See Orzech, 
Sørensen, and Payne 2011: 152. Amoghavajra’s account is 
translated integrally in Orzech 1995. See also Tanaka 2018: 
309–311.
20. Sundb
erg and Giebel 2011: 135–137.
21. On the hi
story of maritime relations between these 
regions, see Guy 2014: 3–13.
22. Sen 201
6: 26; Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 144–145.
23. Sundb
erg and Giebel 2011: 145.
24. Guy 199
4: 295.
25. Sundb
erg and Giebel 2011: 154.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   69 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 74] ---
Yury Khokhlov70
(a complete one-hundred-thousand-verse text of 
the scripture was purportedly lost on the way during 
a storm) and a copy of the Mahāprajñāpāramitā 
sūtra  offered to the Chinese emperor by the Pallava 
king Narasiṃhavarman II.26 The master spent the 
remaining twenty-one years of his life in China 
propagating the Y oga tradition and working on 
translation projects.27 It is especially relevant for 
this study that Vajrabodhi was also known in China 
as a great painter, who was particularly good at 
painting Indian Buddhist images. He was includ -
ed in the Record of Famous Painters of Successive 
Dynasties (Ch.歷代名畫記 , The Lidai minghua ji; 
9.16b–17 a), compiled by Zhang Y anyuan (Ch. 張彥
遠) in 847 .28 The master himself painted numerous 
maṇḍalas. He also designed wooden sculptures 
for the Luoyang Guangfu Temple and a stūpa of 
Vairocana, which was considered an excellent piece 
of work. None of Vajrabodhi’s works are known to 
have survived, but it could be surmised that they 
were most likely executed in the Pallava style.
Vajrabodhi’s disciple Amoghavajra, whom he 
met during his journey to China, is regarded as a 
towering figure in the history of Chinese Buddhism. 
Amoghavajra studied under Vajrabodhi for more 
than twenty years and became a prolific translator, 
second only to Xuanzang (Ch. 玄奘 , c. 602–664 ), 
and an imperial preceptor for three successive Tang 
emperors: Xuanzong (Ch. 玄宗 , r. 712–756 ), Suzong 
(Ch. 肅宗 , r. 756–762 ), and Daizong (Ch. 代宗 , r. 
762–779 ).29 In 742–746 , Amoghavajra travelled to 
Sri Lanka and Southern India, where he received 
several Esoteric initiations and acquired more than 
five hundred Buddhist texts, including a complete 
scripture of the eighteen texts of the Jin’gangding 
Yoga.30
26. Ibid. : 138, 147.
27. Yang 2
018: 27–28.
28. Chou 19
45: 276, n. 30, 280; Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 
132, n. 12.
29. Goble 2
012: 62. 
30. Yang 2018: 33–35, 256–257. It is not known what regions 
Amoghavajra visited while in India; the sources are ex -
tremely vague about the Indian part of his trip and give 
detailed information only on his stay in Sri Lanka. Bearing 
in mind the shortness of the trip and that Amoghavajra 
spent most of his time in Sri Lanka, it is unlikely that he 
travelled beyond Southern India. Amoghavajra made his first significant trans -
lations of the texts obtained during his journey, 
including the first part of the STTS , in the Hexi 
Corridor, in the regional capital city of Liangzhou 
(Ch.凉州 , modern Wuwei) between 754  and 756 . 
He was sent to Hexi upon request of the military 
governor Geshu Han (Ch. 哥舒翰 , 700–757 ) to 
assist the troops with ritual support in the battle-
field against the Tibetans who constantly harassed 
the northwestern frontier.31 In Hexi, Amoghavajra 
was said to have initiated thousands of people into 
the practices of the Y oga tradition and gained many 
followers amongst the local nobility, government, 
and military. The Y oga teachings were propagated 
in Hexi on an unprecedented scale. This can be il-
lustrated by an excerpt from Amoghavajra’s official 
biography composed upon his death in 774, which 
describes the events in 754 :
In the thirteenth year [of Tianbao], [Bukong] 
arrived in Wuwei, where he resided at the 
Kaiyuan Monastery. From the military com -
missioner to officials of the lowest rank, [Bu -
kong] conducted the service of abhiṣeka  for all; 
as many as several thousand people, both the 
gentry and commoners, ascended the altar [to 
receive the service of abhiṣeka ]. [Bukong] im -
parted the teachings of the Five Divisions to his 
clerical disciple, Hanguang. Next, [he] admin -
istered the abhiṣeka  ritual of the Five Divisions 
for Li Yuancong, now the Commissioner of 
Merit, [with the prestigious rank of] Opening 
Bureau, and instructed him in the teachings of 
the Great Maṇḍala of the Diamond Realm.32
It is important to note that Amoghavajra gained 
his renown as an Esoteric master in Hexi, and from 
there it spread to the capitals via Hexi officials and 
military commanders who were his disciples.33 In 
addition, Hexi came to be regarded as the master’s 
ancestral place; towards the end of his life, he was 
awarded the title of Duke of Su and given a nominal 
fief of 3,000  households in Suzhou (Ch. 肅州 ), a dis-
trict in the northwestern part of the Hexi Corridor.34 
31. Yang 2018: 41–42, 264–265.
32. Ibid. : 26
5. ‘The teachings of the five divisions’ refers 
here to the Yoga tradition, while ‘the Great Ma ṇḍala  of 
the Diamond Realm’ stands for the Vajradhātu ma ṇḍala.  
S
ee ibid. : 30. 
33. Ibid. : 4
1–45.
34. Ibid. : 17
0–171, 362.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   70 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 75] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 71
During the turbulent events of the An Lushan 
rebellion and the war with the Tibetans, Amogha-
vajra significantly strengthened his religious and 
political influence at court. He performed count-
less Esoteric initiations and protective rituals for 
the imperial troops, the state, and the emperor. 
The institutionalization of a close group of his 
disciples as a form of governmental organization 
for the purpose of serving the state by perform-
ing apotropaic rituals can be regarded as one of 
Amoghavajra’s major achievements.35 At the same 
time, and as Robert Sharf has argued, the Esoteric 
practices propagated by Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra 
and monks alike should not be regarded as an inde -
pendent tradition/sect/school. What these masters 
promoted was essentially a new ritual technolo -
gy intended for members of the ruling elite, who 
could afford spending considerable resources on 
elaborate rituals conducted for the simultaneous 
achievement of mundane and supermundane goals. 
Sharf has emphasized that in the 8th century these 
new teachings were transmitted to monastics from 
a variety of backgrounds and beyond sectarian lines 
imposed by later traditions.36 
Amoghavajra and his Buddhist institution 
reached the peak of their power during the reign 
of Daizong (762 –779 ). The master had a vast 
network of supporters and disciples, including the 
most powerful people of the empire; all the court 
officials and commanders of the imperial guards 
were required to be initiated into the Vajradhātu 
maṇḍala an
d to participate in rituals orchestrated 
by Amoghavajra.37 Among the master’s other deeds 
are the translation of a great number of Buddhist 
texts and the promotion of the cult of Mañjuśrī and 
Mount Wutai.38
Liangzhou, where Amoghavajra translated the 
STTS and initiated thousands of people into the 
Y oga tradition in 754 –756 , fell to the Tibetans in 
758 and became a major centre of the Tibetan ad-
ministration over the eastern areas.39 It is worth re-
35. Ibid. : 194–195.
36. Sharf 2
017: 85–86, 114; for a more nuanced point of 
view, see Orzech 2006.
37. Yang 2
018: 188–200.
38. Ibid. : 1
47–160.
39. van Sch
aik and Galambos 2012: 46.membering that Tibetan Buddhism and the Tibetan 
Buddhist order were at this time in their early form -
ative stage. Only in the 760 s Buddhism started to be 
promoted by the Tibetan emperor Trisong Detsen 
(Tib. Khri srong lde btsan, r. c. 742 –797 ); the first 
Tibetan monastery of Samye (Tib. Bsam yas) was 
consecrated only in 779 .40 In general, the Tibetan 
ruling elite was highly suspicious towards Esoteric 
teachings, however the STTS and closely related 
texts (largely correspond to Y ogatantras according 
to the Tibetan classification) were not only per -
mitted, but, in parallel with the contemporaneous 
developments in Chinese state Buddhism, became 
a foundation for official Buddhist ceremony in the 
late 8th century (this will be discussed in detail in 
Part 4).41 It is also clear that Tibetan interest in the 
Y oga tradition emerged in close temporal proximity 
to Amoghavajra’s propagation of this tantric system 
in the Hexi Corridor, which soon after was taken 
by the Tibetan Empire. 
Amoghavajra died in 774 , two years before 
the Tibetan conquest of Guazhou (Ch. , the 
prefecture containing the Yulin caves). With the 
conquest of Shazhou (Ch. , the prefecture con-
taining Dunhuang) in 786, the whole Hexi Corri-
dor came under Tibetan rule. Tibetans continued 
the patronage of existing Buddhist institutions in 
Hexi, which were numerous, and many were large, 
and sponsored building of several new monasteries 
and temples.42 However, Tibetan impact on Bud-
dhist thought and Buddhist art in Hexi during this 
period of occupation remains largely unclear, since 
major developments with regard to the Tibetan 
appropriation of Buddhism took place during 
or after the conquest of the Hexi Corridor. One 
undisputable sign of the Tibetan input on Dun -
huang art, however, is depictions of Tibetans and 
a Tibetan emperor in several caves at Mogao and 
Yulin.43 Significantly, a Chinese emperor contin -
ued to be depicted as well and his superior status 
was not diminished. For instance, in a painting in 
40. Kapstein 2000: 60.
41. Weinb
erger 2010: 140–150.
42. Sha 201
3: 152–156; van Schaik and Galambos 2012: 62. 
On Buddhist institutions in Hexi during the Tibet period, 
see Horlemann 2012. 
43. Just a fe
w examples: Yulin Cave 25 and Mogao Caves 
158, 231, 359. See Sha 2013: 53–81.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   71 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 76] ---
Yury Khokhlov72
Mogao Cave 231  dated to circa 839 , which shows 
the debate between Mañjuśrī and Vimalakīrti, a 
Chinese emperor retains his exalted position as 
the Buddhist authority and is shown in the entou-
rage of Mañjuśrī, while a Tibetan emperor leads 
a procession of foreign/barbarian kings on the 
side of Vimalakīrti.44 The Dunhuang manuscripts 
mention some mixed Sino-Tibetan Buddhist com-
munities and show no signs of religious opposition 
between Chinese and Tibetan Buddhists.45 Given 
the richness of Buddhist culture in Hexi and written 
records describing Tibetans eagerly seeking to learn 
the Dharma  from the Chinese, the impact of Hexi 
Buddhist culture on what was to become known as 
Tibetan Buddhism and Tibetan Buddhist art must 
have been significant.46 The Tibetan period in Hexi 
lasted until the mid-9 th century, when, following 
the collapse of the Tibetan Empire, most of the 
region returned under Tang control. Despite this 
political upheaval, many Tibetans remained in the 
region and the Tibetan language continued to be 
widely used.47 
To summarize, when Tibetans arrived in Hexi, 
they found themselves in a highly sophisticated 
Buddhist environment, where Esoteric teachings, 
especially those of the Y oga tradition, enjoyed great 
prestige. The Buddhist art in Hexi was character -
ized by an increasing popularity of Indianized styles 
and Esoteric imagery. 
44. For a discussion on the symbolism of representations 
of the Mañjuśrī–Vimalakīrti debate in Dunhuang, see 
Schmid 2006: 183–185. For a reproduction of the scene 
from Cave 231, see Debreczeny 2019: 50, fig. 1.2.
45. Søren
sen 2000: 41.
46. For example, according to the 
Testament of Ba (Tib. 
Dba’ bzhed / Sba bzhed), a historical account on the origin 
of Buddhism in Tibet that was probably compiled in  
the 11th or 12th centuries, two Tibetan delegations were 
sent to the Chinese capital to learn Buddhist teachings 
in the second half of the 8th century. It is also stated that 
one thousand Buddhist texts were granted by the Chinese 
emperor and brought to Tibet by one of these delegations. 
See Wangdu and Diemberger 2000: 16–17, 21, 42 n. 91, 49 n. 
121–122, 52 n. 136, 138, and 70 n. 245. Moreover, this source 
shows that Buddhism in 8th-century Tibet was strongly 
associated with China and sometimes referred to as the  
doctrine of China. See Wangdu and Diemberger 2000:  
37, n. 71.
47. On a wide u
se of Tibetan language in Hexi and even 
in correspondence between non-Tibetan parties, see van 
Schaik and Galambos 2012: 67–68; Takata 2019.part 2. definitions and origins
A list of paintings executed in the artistic mode 
discussed in this article is presented in Appendix 
3.1. It is by no means exhaustive and includes only 
the most significant published examples. The ma-
jority of the paintings depict maṇḍala-like com-
positions. Common central figures include Vairo-
canābhisambodhi (see section 2.2),48 Vajrasattva, a 
Buddha, four-armed Amoghapāśa (see section 2.3), 
and two-armed Avalokiteśvara. As will be shown, 
these images mostly draw from the repertoire of the 
Yoga tradition. Other subjects include Vairocanā- 
bhisambodhi with the eight great bodhisattvas (see 
section 2.1) as well as Kubera with attendants (see 
section 2.4). In addition, the list includes portable 
paintings with solitary figures of bodhisattvas (see 
section 2.5) and paintings with stylistically mixed 
imagery (see section 2.6). 
Before proceeding to a detailed discussion 
of the paintings under review, it is necessary to 
mention that for almost all of them potential 
textual sources can be found in both the Chinese 
and Tibetan traditions. Since it has been histori-
cally maintained that Tibetan Esoteric Buddhism 
stems directly from the Indian tradition, possible 
relationships between the parallel Chinese and 
Tibetan texts have been rarely seriously consid -
ered. Moreover, it is commonly believed that de-
veloped Esoteric Buddhism did not exist in Dun-
huang/Hexi before the Tibetan conquest. Thus, a 
decisive factor for the attribution of the discussed 
images to the Tibetan tradition has often been 
a combination of their Indian artistic mode (as 
opposed to the Chinese mode), which was un -
derstood as a sign of the Tibetan influence, with 
Esoteric subject matter. In the following, I will 
challenge the validity of this approach.
48. Following Kimiaki Tanaka, I use Vairocanābhisam -
bodhi as a reference to bejewelled Vairocana displaying 
dhyāna-mudrā. See Tanaka 2018. This form was initially 
described in the Vairocanābhisambodhitantra (VAT). See 
Wayman and Tajima 1998: 8. However, images of Vai-
ro-cana  in this form do not necessarily signify the context 
of the VAT. 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   72 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 77] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 73
2.1 representations of 
vair
ocanābhisambodhi with the 
eight great bodhisattvas in hexi 
and their spread to eastern tibet 
Yulin Cave 25
The scholarship on Yulin Cave 25  perfectly illus -
trates issues surrounding the attribution of the 
imagery under review to Tibetan influence and 
therefore I discuss it first and at greatest length. The 
cave was excavated during the period of Tibetan 
rule in Guazhou and is currently dated by the Dun -
huang Academy to the early years of the Tibetan 
period (i.e. 776–781 ).49 The centre of the cave is 
occupied by a sculptural representation of Vairo-
cana perhaps dating to the Qing dynasty, which 
could be a replica of the original sculpture. The 
wall paintings are regarded as originals. The central 
(eastern) wall of the main chamber is occupied by 
Indianized images of Vairocanābhisambodhi and 
the eight great bodhisattvas (Fig. 3.1).50 The bo -
dhisattvas are identified by Chinese inscriptions 
as Ākāśagarbha, Kṣitigarbha, Maitreya, Mañjuśrī, 
Vajrapāṇi, Avalokiteśvara, Sarvanivāraṇaviṣkam-  
bhin, and Samantabhadra, who altogether are 
known as the eight great bodhisattvas.51 This group 
of nine—Vairocanābhisambodhi and the eight 
great bodhisattvas—will henceforth be abbreviat -
ed as V AEGB. The rest of the paintings in the cave 
are executed in the Chinese mode. They include 
the Pure Lands of Maitreya and Amitābha on the 
northern and southern walls, respectively; the 
bodhisattvas Mañjuśrī and Samantabhadra with 
attendants and Sudhana on the western wall; and 
49. A review of scholarship on the attribution of the 
cave t
o the Tibetan period can be found in Kapstein 
2009: 56–57. The date period 776–781 is provided by the 
Dunhuang Academy in https://www.e-dunhuang.com/
cave/10.0001/0001.0002.0025 (last accessed 23 November 
2020). 
50. Only four bodhisattvas on the left side have survived 
to the present day. The group on the right side can be seen 
in the old photograph taken 
in the 1940s that are current- 
ly preserved in the Lo Archive, Princeton, see Khokhlov 
2019: fig. 1.
51. Wang 20
18: 108–109. The most comprehensive study  
on the eight great bodhisattvas as a group is in Bautze-
Picron 1997.six standing bodhisattvas, whose identities are not 
entirely clear, and who are depicted on the corners 
of the cave. These Indianized and Chinese images 
show identical line structures and shading, and 
the faces of some figures between the two groups 
bear a striking resemblance.52 From this it is clear 
that, differences in mode notwithstanding, all the 
paintings in the cave were likely executed by the 
same group of artists.
A publication produced in 2000  by the Dun-
huang Academy for a centennial commemoration 
of the discovery of the library in Mogao Cave 17  
briefly mentions that the central composition 
(V AEGB) of Yulin Cave 25 ‘indicates close ties to 
Master Amoghavajra’s spread of Tantrism in the 
Hexi region’ .53 This idea has been ignored in later 
scholarship. Instead, the coexistence of the two ar -
tistic modes as well as the coexistence of Esoteric 
and traditional Pure Land subjects within the cave 
has been ascribed to the cultural influence of Tibet. 
The style of the composition of V AEGB has been 
understood either as the Tibetan style or as the Pāla 
style of Northern India being transmitted through 
Tibet.54 In the following, I will argue against the 
52. See Khokhlov 2019: fig. 3.
53. Unfortunately, no arguments supporting this attri -
bution were given. See Zhang 2000: 31.
54. The publications arguing for the Tibetan background 
of the composition include Kapstein 2004, 2009, 2014; Sha 
2013; Wang 2018; Debreczeny 2019.
In a series of articles, Matthew Kapstein has developed 
a theory that Yulin Cave 25 should be identified as a temple 
built by Tibetans to commemorate a peace treaty between 
the Tibetan and Tang empires made in 821–822. Although 
the iconographic programme of Yulin Cave 25 only par -
tially matches the description of the temple found in the 
Dunhuang manuscripts, the author develops his idea by 
pointing to the popularity of Vairocana cult in the Tibetan 
Empire and to the existence of roughly contemporaneous 
rock carvings of VAEGB in Eastern Tibet (Kapstein 2009: 
53, 58). Later on, I will discuss these Tibetan rock carvings 
in detail and show that they were most likely created under 
the influence from the Hexi Corridor. As stylistic evidence, 
the author compared the figure of Vairocana from Cave 
25 to an undated sculptural representation of the same 
deity that was tentatively ascribed to the Imperial period 
by other scholars. The sculpture, however, is executed in 
a considerably different style, which makes it difficult to 
accept the author’s point. Summarizing his argument, Kap -
stein emphasizes the coexistence of the two styles in the 
cave and concludes: ‘In both iconography and style, Anxi 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   73 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 78] ---
Yury Khokhlov74
Yulin 25 thus expresses the coexistence of the Tibetan and 
Chinese Buddhist worlds. On the surface at least, it seems 
an especially fitting memorial to a peace-accord between 
the two powers’ (Kapstein 2009: 54). Recently, the author 
revised his initial notion and suggested instead that Yulin 
Cave 25 could be either an earlier Tibetan model for the 
treaty temple or its copy (Kapstein 2014). As for the coexis -
tence of Indianized and Chinese depictions, as well as the 
coexistence of Esoteric and Pure Land subjects, such mixed 
imagery can be already found in Tang dynasty caves pre -
dating the Tibetan period (see examples in the next section). 
Sha Wutian’s research on Cave 25 was published in his 
monograph devoted to Dunhuang art of the Tibetan period. 
The author postulates that the figures of VAEGB in Cave 
25 represent the Tibetan style, and more specifically, the 
Fig. 3.1: The extant part of the wall painting Vairocana and the eight great bodhisattvas, eastern wall of the main 
chamber, late 8th century, Tibetan period, Yulin Cave 25, China (with the permission of the Dunhuang Academy). 
northeast Indian Pāla style as transmitted through Tibet 
(Sha 2013: 360–382, 470–492). These statements seem to 
ignore the fact that no comparable depictions that can be 
dated to the period before the Tibetan occupation of Hexi 
are known from Tibet. Moreover, the discussed material 
certainly does not belong to the Pāla artistic tradition. 
Michelle Wang in her recent publication Ma ṇḍalas 
in the Making came to the conclusion that the depiction 
of VAEGB in Cave 25 belongs to the Tibetan Buddhist 
tradition and is executed in the Tibetan style, which she 
defines as a ‘Nepalese-derived Tibetan style’. The author 
compared the images from the cave to Tibetan and Nep -
alese sculptures and noted various similarities. Significant 
differences were, however, overlooked. The Eastern Tibetan 
rock carvings and the coexistence of the two artistic modes 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   74 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 79] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 75
quest of Guazhou in 776 .57 Particularly interesting 
are six rectangular panels painted inside the niches. 
They contain compositions akin to that of V AEGB 
in Yulin Cave 25 .58 
It is thus evident that the coexistence of the 
Indian and Chinese artistic modes as well as of Pure 
Land and Esoteric imagery within Yulin Cave 25 
is a continuation of the trend that started in Dun-
huang earlier. Similarly, the depiction of the group 
of V AEGB itself seems to be based on a template 
that was popular in Hexi before the Tibetan con -
quest.
Southern Indian Artistic Mode 
Esoteric teachings were transmitted not only 
through texts, but also through their accompany-
ing images.59 Although none of the original Indian 
illustrations survive in China, the fact that they 
existed is evident from Chinese translations made 
by Indians. For example, Śubhākarasiṃha (Ch. 善
無畏 , 637–735 ), an Indian translator-monk living in 
Tang China, frequently made references to icono-
graphic illustrations in his texts.60 In addition, the 
importance of imagery in the transmission of Es-
oteric teachings was stressed by Kūkai (Ch. 空海 , 
774–835 ), who studied in China under Amogha -
vajra’s successor Huiguo (Ch. 惠果 , 746–806 ). In 
his inventory (dated 806 ), Kūkai states: ‘The secret 
wisdom of the true words is hidden and implicit 
in scriptural texts; only through imagery can it be 
57. Mogao Cave 148 is discussed in Lee 2010: 181–201. 
Esoteric imagery in the cave is discussed in Liu 2008.
58. See, for example, a panel reproduced in Khokhlov 
2019: fig. 5. This panel depicts bodhisattva Bhaiṣajyarā -
ja surrounded by eight bodhisattvas and two heavenly 
kings. It has a similar layout to the image in Yulin Cave 25  
(Fig. 3.1), with a large central figure placed under a canopy 
and flanked by two groups of smaller figures shown sym -
metrically on either side. The lotus seat of the central figure 
and the two chief bodhisattvas are almost identical to the 
lotus seats in the Yulin composition. In both paintings, the 
stems of the lotus seats of the bodhisattvas grow from the 
seat of the central divinity. Small lotus flowers and leaves 
depicted in the intermediate space are very similar in both 
compositions as well. 
59. This has b
een recently discussed by Kimiaki Tanaka, 
see Tanaka 2018: 125–126.
60. Ibid.
: 125–126.current scholarly consensus and demonstrate that 
neither such thematic and stylistic diversity nor the 
style of the group of V AEGB can be ascribed to the 
Tibetan or Pāla-Indian influence. 
stylistic considerations
Indian and Chinese Modes in Hexi Art before 
the Tibetan Conquest
Indianized imagery started to appear early on in 
Tang dynasty caves.55 Striking examples can be 
seen in Mogao Cave 329  that belongs to the early 
Tang period (618–712 ). A painting on the east wall 
depicts two bodhisattvas, which are executed in 
two different artistic modes.56 The bodhisattva on 
the right is shown in the Chinese mode, which 
is characterized by a round halo, long scarves 
wrapped around the body, and a voluptuous lower 
garment. The bodhisattva on the left, on the other 
hand, is shown in the Indian mode. It is comparable 
to what is found in Yulin Cave 25  (Fig. 3.1 ), where 
the figures also have inverted U-shaped halos and 
wear similar lower garments resembling trousers.
Another example of such coexistence of the 
two modes can be found in Mogao Cave 148  that 
contains depictions of the Buddha’s Parinirvāṇa 
and various Pure lands, which are painted in the 
Chinese mode, and Esoteric imagery (e.g. various 
multi-armed forms of Avalokiteśvara) painted in 
the Indian mode. According to the engraved in -
scription on the stele at the entrance, the cave was 
completed sometime between 766 and 776 —that 
is within the decade leading up to the Tibetan con-
in Cave 25, named as ‘stylistic bilingualism’, were regarded 
as evidence for the Tibetan origin of the cult of VAEGB in 
Hexi (Wang 2018: 91–121).
In the latest contribution to this subject, Karl De -
breczeny sees the group of VAEGB in Yulin Cave 25 as a 
manifestation of the new aesthetic and religious interests 
introduced under Tibetan rule (Debreczeny 2019: 24–25). 
The author’s argument is essentially based on the works 
by Kapstein, Sha and Wang and therefore has the same 
shortcomings.
55. For exa
mple, Mogao Caves 202, 321, 329, and 335. See 
Sha 2013: 133–134.
56. Khokhl
ov 2019: fig. 4. For a description of this cave 
and additional images, see https://www.e-dunhuang.com/
cave/10.0001/0001.0001.0329 (last accessed 22 April 2019).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   75 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 80] ---
Yury Khokhlov76
properly transmitted’ .61 In China, original Indian 
illustrations were copied by local artists, and, as in 
the case of Vajrabodhi, many Indian monks them-
selves were able to produce such images. In any case, 
works with Indian background were considered 
extremely valuable; they were carefully recorded 
and praised in monastic inventories. Furthermore, 
accuracy in copying these images was regarded 
crucial for the authenticity and efficacy of replicas 
in Esoteric rituals.62 Another important feature of 
Chinese practice was the standardization of reli-
gious imagery. Standardized models and templates 
for replication were known as yang  (Ch. 樣). In 
her recent book, Hsueh-man Shen (Ch. 沈雪曼 ) 
describes many Tang dynasty scrolls with yang of 
iconic images of various deities, including a group 
of the eight great bodhisattvas.63
It is through these processes of copying, stand-
ardization and replication that elements of Indian 
costumes and decorations must have been adopted 
in Chinese art. In this regard, tracing the origins 
of distinctive decorative elements in early Chinese 
Esoteric imagery yields an important trace for 
determining the provenance of the artistic tradi -
tion to which Indian prototypes belonged and, by 
extension, the provenance of the corresponding 
teachings. 
The group of V AEGB in Cave 25  was likely 
based on standardized models.  The bodhisattvas 
are shown either frontally or in a three-quarter 
profile and all have almost identical decorations. 
Diversity is achieved through different hand ges-
tures, leg positions, and attributes. The figures are 
drawn in a distinctive artistic mode, which can be 
recognized by certain peculiarities (see an enlarged 
image of Vairocana in Fig. 3.2 ) such as:
–  elongat
ed and Y-shaped torsos;
–  crowns and armbands with spikes of pearls or 
little spears (henceforth spiked crowns and 
armbands, see close-ups in Fig. 3.2 );
61. Shen 2019: 154.
62. Shen shows that the inventories of objects taken from 
China to Japan during the Tang specifically comment on 
images produced by Indian masters or originated from 
India, see Shen 2019: 154. The earliest extant example of 
iconographical drawings is an early 9th-century Chinese 
scroll known as the gobu shinkan (Ch. 五部心觀 ), see 
Tanaka 2018: 293–294. 
63. Shen 20
19: 149–155.–  broad necklaces with swags of pendants 
(henceforth swagged necklaces); and
–  earrin
gs with large and flat pendants.
These elements are present in the group of paintings 
which this article is concerned with. The discussed 
examples belong to different periods (from the 8th 
to 11th century) and their styles are different as well. 
In addition, it is not always the case that all of the 
features listed above are present in a given image. 
Of the four characteristics, the spiked decorations 
are the most distinctive and persistent feature. It 
is a matter of fact that such decorations are almost 
exclusively associated with Southern Indian art 
(see examples in Figs. 3.3, 3.9, 3.18, 3.19 ). In this 
regard, they are neither found in Tibetan art prior 
to the occupation of Hexi, nor in the art of North-
ern India, Nepal, or Central Asia, artistic traditions 
which, along with that of China, contributed to 
the formation of Buddhist art in Tibet. As such, 
this indeed eliminates the currently assumed pos-
sibility of the alleged Tibetan background of the 
discussed imagery. In contrast, these features cor -
respond to the Southern Indian current in Chinese 
Esoteric Buddhism represented by Vajrabodhi and 
Amoghavajra. 
In the 7 th and 8 th centuries, there were two 
regions in Southern India where Esoteric Buddhism 
was prominent and these exact kinds of spiked 
jewelry were common in artistic representations. 
They are Tamil Nadu and the Western Deccan. With 
regard to Sri Lanka, which was an important desti-
nation for both Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra, it is 
unlikely that the discussed artistic mode in Hexi art 
has a Sri Lankan origin. Although Sri Lankan Bud-
dhism and associated art were greatly influenced 
from the Pallava Kingdom of Tamil Nadu,64 few Sri 
Lankan images can be compared to the discussed 
Hexi examples.65 
64. On the Pallava Buddhist and artistic influence in Sri 
Lank
a, see Indrapala 2005: 189–192; Dohanian 1983.
65. On Sri Lankan Mahāyāna imagery, see Dohanian 1977. 
The most comprehensive research on Sri Lankan Buddhist 
sculptures can be found in von Schroeder 1990. It has to be 
noted, however, that remaining Esoteric Buddhist mate -
rial is only lately being studied and the chronology of Sri 
Lankan Buddhist art of that period is debatable because 
of a lack of firmly datable material.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   76 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 81] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 77
Fig. 3.2: Vairocana and close-ups of the crown and armband, detail of Fig. 3.1. 
The connections with the art of Tamil Nadu 
are not surprising as the region was the home 
of Esoteric teachings propagated by Vajrabodhi 
and Amoghavajra.66 In addition, Vajrabodhi as a 
painter most likely belonged to the Pallava artistic 
tradition that flourished in Tamil Nadu, where the 
master spent many years studying Esoteric teach-
ings before travelling to China. Having in mind 
the records about imagery produced by Vajrabo-
dhi in China and the Chinese practices of copying, 
66. On Esoteric Buddhism in Tamil Nadu, see Yang 2018: 
179–180, n. 370. In particular, on Kāñcīpuram as a centre of 
Esoteric Buddhism, see fn. 17. Esoteric Buddhism in Tamil 
Nadu was probably part of the larger tradition encompass -
ing the neighbouring Andhra region, the motherland of 
the Pallavas. On the development of Esoteric Buddhism 
in Andhra, see Barber 2008.standardization, and replication, we can assume 
that a Chinese artistic tradition based on Pallava 
art and closely associated with Vajrabodhi emerged 
in the Tang capitals by the mid-8th century and 
spread from there to Hexi/Dunhuang. The religious 
and artistic interexchange between Dunhuang and 
the Tang capitals is well recorded67 and thus Va -
jrabodhi’s teachings and related pattern books and 
iconographic sketches likely reached Hexi already 
during the master’s lifetime. Nevertheless, the tra-
dition undoubtedly owes its greater popularity in 
the region to Amoghavajra. As mentioned, the 
master not only taught in Hexi, but also made his 
first major translations there.
67. Fraser 2004: 52–53.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   77 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 82] ---
Yury Khokhlov78
Regarding the Western Deccan, the existence of 
Esoteric Buddhism in the 8th century in that locale 
is evident from Ellora cave sculpture. It has been also 
suggested that the region could have been the origin 
place of such fundamental scripture as the VAT.68 
At the same time, numerous cross-regional military 
raids of the Pallavas (ruling in Tamil Nadu), and the 
Cālukyas (ruling in the Deccan) in the 7 th and 8th 
centuries intensified cultural exchange across the 
peninsula and it is not unlikely that the respective 
Buddhist communities were in conversation, influ-
encing each other and sharing major scriptures.69 
For example, the earliest surviving images display-
ing iconography that could be related to the STTS  
are found in the Western Deccan, at Ellora Cave 12 
(early 8th century).70 In general, Ellora sculptures 
from the 8th century onwards reflect increasing 
influence from the South of the Peninsula, and in 
particular the Pallava influence.71 
Regrettably, we do not know what specific 
regions Amoghavajra visited while in India; the 
sources are extremely vague about the Indian part 
of his trip and give detailed information only on his 
stay in Sri Lanka.72 It is fair to assume, however, that 
Tamil Nadu, a place where Vajrabodhi studied the 
Y oga tradition before going to China, would have 
been Amoghavalra’s prime destination, though a 
small possibility that he visited other regions, in-
cluding the Western Deccan, cannot be entirely 
excluded. In addition, it is possible that materials 
collected by Amoghavajra in Sri Lanka were of an 
Indian origin, as the introduction of Esoteric Bud-
dhism to Sri Lanka is associated with Tamil Bud-
dhists who migrated to the island in the 7th and 8th 
68. On the development of Esoteric imagery in the 
West
ern Deccan, see Huntington 1981; Malandra 1993; 
Bautze-Picron 2000. On possible geographical origins of 
VAT, see Wayman and Tajima 1998: 11–12. 
69. On artistic and architectural connections between 
these regions see Dayalan n.d.
70. Tanak
a 2018: 265, fig. 4.9.  
71. Malandra 1993: 116–117. The most striking example of 
Pallava influence is the famous Kailāsanātha monument, 
which was built in the mid-8th century and partially pat -
terned on Kailāsanātha temple in Kāñcīpuram.
72. Yang 2018: 256–257. Sundberg and Giebel even sug -
gested that Amoghavajra might have limited his travel to 
Sri Lanka only. See Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 148–151.centuries fleeing from the antagonistic movements 
in Śaivism and Vaiṣṇavism that were specifically 
directed against Buddhists and Jains.73 
As a result of the anti-Buddhist campaigns, only 
a handful of Pallava Buddhist images survived. 
Most of them have been vandalized and were found 
in the vicinity of Hindu temples that suggests a 
violent expropriation and conversion of Buddhist 
establishments.74 For our purposes, the Pallava 
stylistic features can be reconstructed from abun-
dant examples of Brahmanic imagery. For instance, 
a Pallava sculpture in Fig. 3.3  possesses all major 
characteristics of the discussed artistic mode in 
73. Indrapala 2005: 181, 192–193; Yang 2018: 180–181; Da -
vids
on 2002: 192.
74. Rao 191
5; Verardi 2018: 296ff., fig. 4.Fig. 3.3: Śiva as Gaṅgādhara (detail), stone relief, 
7th century, Pallava period, Lalitankura cave, 
Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu, India. (Photo courtesy of 
Emmanuel Francis)
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   78 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 83] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 79
Hexi art and show remarkable similarities to the 
aesthetics of the Yulin images (Fig. 3.1 ): elongat-
ed and Y-shaped torsos, tall headdresses, spiked 
crowns and armbands, and large earrings.75
In the Western Deccan, Buddhist material 
heritage largely survived. Ellora Caves 11 and 
12, which are traditionally dated to the early-8th 
century, represent the last large-scale Buddhist 
undertaking in the region.76 The eight great 
bodhisattvas as a group assume prominent po-
75. See another Pallava example in Khokhlov 2019: fig. 8.
76. For a detailed analysis of Buddhist art at Ellora in 
general and these caves in particular, see Malandra 1993.sitions in both caves. While Cave 11  contains 
two groups of the standing bodhisattvas, Cave 
12 has one group of the seated and two groups 
of the standing bodhisattvas. Fig. 3.4 , from the 
first floor of Cave 12, shows two groups of the 
four bodhisattvas flanking a statue of the Buddha 
with dharmacakra- mudrā. Their identities were 
reconstructed by Malandra and Bautze-Picron 
according to their attributes and they appear to 
be the same bodhisattvas as the bodhisattvas in 
Yulin Cave 25 .77 The Ellora and Yulin bodhisattvas 
are visually similar as well and convey the Pallava 
77. Malandra 1996: 197; Bautze-Picron 1997: 10–11.
Fig. 3.4: Eight bodhisattvas, early 8th century, first floor of Ellora Cave 12, 
Maharashtra, India. (Photos courtesy of Deepanjana and Arno Klein)
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   79 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 84] ---
Yury Khokhlov80
aesthetics (see comparison in Fig. 3.5 ). They have 
elongated and Y-shaped torsos, crowns with 
spikes, and swagged necklaces. The armbands 
display similar leaf-like elements decorated with 
spikes. Spikes in the armbands of the sculptures 
are not clearly visible in the pictures as the deco-
rations were finished with plaster, which is largely 
lost now.
It is evident that stylistically the images in 
Yulin Cave 25  depended on Southern Indian 
prototypes and that the defining characteristics 
of the discussed artistic mode have a Southern 
Indian origin. Therefore, from here onwards this 
mode in Hexi art will be labelled as the Southern 
Indian mode.
iconographical considerations 
Ellora Caves 11  and 12  and their Iconographic 
Innovations
According to Geri Malandra, Ellora Caves 11  and 12  
reflect Esoteric teachings, which were new for the Deccan, and this new iconography was executed 
in a new style that shows a noticeable influence 
from the South of the Peninsula.78 She suggested 
that the teachings reflected in the caves were im -
ported to the Deccan and that they might have 
had the same origin as the sculptures’ new style. In 
support for her theory, Malandra noted that con-
temporaneous or slightly later representations of 
the eight great bodhisattvas are found in Odisha 
and Java that points to the Southern (as opposed to 
the Northern) source of the innovations.79 Indeed, 
Northern Indian depictions of the eight great bo-
dhisattvas mostly date from the 9 th century and 
later.80 In addition, the popularity of the cult of the 
eight great bodhisattvas in the 8th or 9th centuries 
is evident in the Malay Peninsula,81 as well as in 
78. Malandra 1993: 116–117; Malandra 1996: 206. 
79. Malan
dra 1996: 205–206. 
80. Bautz
e-Picron 1997: 14–27.
81. Skilling 2011: 375–377; Sharrock and Bunker 2016: 244; 
Acri 2018.
Fig. 3.5: Detail of Fig. 3.1 (left); detail of Fig. 3.4 (right).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   80 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 85] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 81
China (discussed in this Part and in Part 4), where 
it was initially introduced by Puṇyodaya (Nati 那提 , 
fl. 650s) in the 7 th century probably from Southeast 
Asia (Cambodia).82 This distribution implies that 
the cult of the eight great bodhisattvas was popular 
in the eastern coastal areas of the Indian Peninsula 
that historically played a key role in maritime re-
lations of Southern Indian polities with Southeast 
Asia and China. Moreover, the Pallava-influenced 
style of the Dunhuang depictions points specifical-
ly to Tamil Nadu as a source of the cult in China. 
Similarly, the Pallava-influenced style of the Ellora 
sculptures should be regarded as evidence for a 
Tamil Nadu origin of the respective teachings in 
the Western Deccan as well. As discussed, travel -
ling monks and pilgrims were instrumental in the 
transmission of new teachings and their art forms. 
Ellora was an important holy site (Skt. tīrtha) , a 
place of pilgrimage that attracted people from 
distant lands and different religious communities; 
its sacred status encouraged commissioning of re-
ligious imagery at the site. Lisa Owen has recently 
shown, for instance, that Ellora Jain caves reflect ac -
tivities of Jain communities associated with Tamil 
Nadu and Karnataka.83 Although donors of the dis-
cussed Buddhist caves remain unknown, there is a 
possibility that they hailed from the South as well.84 
It is also possible that some Buddhist communities 
migrated from Tamil Nadu to the Western Deccan 
during the period of interreligious antagonism in 
their homeland. 
82. Acri 2018. Also see fn. 86. 
83. Owen 20
12: 16, 20, 160–163. 
84. Buddhist monks from Tamil Nadu and Andhra 
were active even in Northern India. Bautze-Picron has 
recently discussed a number of stone and bronze images 
from Kurkihar dating from the 8th to 11th century, which 
bear inscriptions mentioning the donors who hailed from 
Kāñcīpuram and Andhra. Notable among these are two 
circa 9th-century stone slabs that show a set of the eight 
great bodhisattvas around the Buddha. See Bautze-Picron 
2015: figs. 91, 92. In a personal communication on 9 August 
2019, Bautze-Picron remarked that these slabs would seem 
to suggest that the cult of the eight great bodhisattvas 
might have been introduced to Bihar from Tamil Nadu 
and Andhra.The Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra 
In addition to the sculptural groups of the eight 
great bodhisattvas, Ellora Cave 12  contains five wall 
reliefs of ma ṇḍalas of the eight great bodhisattvas 
centred around a dhyāna -mudrā Buddha, who was 
identified by scholars as Vairocana (Fig. 3.6 ). The 
bodhisattvas in the maṇḍalas
 were recognized by 
their attributes and they also happen to be the same 
bodhisattvas as those depicted in Yulin Cave 25 .85 
According to Kimiaki Tanaka, the group of Vairo-
cana and the eight great bodhisattvas ultimately 
originates from the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra (‘ The 
sūtra  of the ma ṇḍala o f the eight great bodhisat -
tvas’), which is also the most probable source of the 
maṇḍalas in Ellora C ave 12.86 The central figure 
of the Tathāgata is only briefly described in the 
text87 and this perhaps explains an iconographic 
variety of his representations. He can be depicted 
unadorned, like in the Ellora ma ṇḍalas (F
ig. 3.6), 
or bejewelled, like in the Yulin composition (Fig. 
3.1), and with the bhūmisparśa-, dharmacakra- or  
85. On the identification of the figures in these  maṇḍala s, 
see Malandra 1996: 197, 201; Tanaka 2018: 141–144.
86. Tanak
a 2018: 92–93.
87. On the description of the eight great bodhisattvas 
and Buddha in the text, see de Visser 1915: 15–17.
Fig. 3.6: Ma ṇḍala of the eight great bodhisattvas, early 
8th century
, Ellora Cave 12, Maharashtra, India. (Photo 
courtesy of Deepanjana and Arno Klein)
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   81 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 86] ---
Yury Khokhlov82
dhyāna-mudrā. Examples of the group with the 
central figure displaying the dhyāna -mudrā are rel -
atively rare in India and found only in the southern 
part, namely in the Western Deccan (Ellora) and 
Odisha (Ratnagiri).88 Thus, it is evident that the 
iconography of the group depicted in Yulin Cave 
25 was particularly common in Southern India. The 
Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra was translat ed by Amogha-  
vajra (T 1167 )89 and the central deity of the ma ṇḍala 
in his text is described as ‘Tathāgata in His True 
Golden Form Body’ (如來真金色身 ).90 This epithet 
perhaps refers to Vairocanābhisambodhi, a form 
of Vairocana, which initially appeared in the VAT 
and is described there as having a golden body (in 
contrast, for example, with the Vairocana of the 
STTS, whose colour is white), bejewelled and dis-
playing the dhyāna-mudrā .91 This is precisely how 
Vairocana is depicted in Yulin Cave 25 . 
To summarize, in both style and iconography 
the Yulin group of V AEGB is closely related to 
the Southern Indian examples (Western Deccan, 
Odisha).
The Bhadracarī
The popularity of the eight great bodhisattvas in 
Southern Indian Buddhism is reflected in Amogha-
vajra’s textual heritage. In addition to the transla-
tion of the Aṣṭama ṇḍalak
asūtra, Amoghavajra in-
tegrated the eight great bodhisattvas into practices 
of such popular prayers as the Bhadracarī and the  
Uṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇī.92 These combinations were 
88. Northern Indian examples show Buddha/Vairocana 
either with the bhūmisparśa-  or dharmacakra -mudrā. See 
Bautze-Picron 1997; Tanaka 2018: 81–82.
89. The sūtra was initially translated into Chinese by 
Puṇyodaya in the 7th century (T 486), but it became partic- 
ularly popular in the translation by Amoghavajra, who as-
signed to the ma ṇḍala of the eight great bodhisattvas much 
greater importance, see Lin 1935. There are two Tibetan 
versions of the sūtra; both are believed to be translated 
during the Imperial period, see Skilling 2011: 376, n. 9, 10, 11.
90. I am grateful to Geoffrey Goble for sharing this in-  
formation. Personal communication, 25 July 2018.  
91. For a description of Vairocana in the VAT, see 
Wayman and Tajima 1998: 101. The relation between the 
maṇḍala of the eight great bodhisattvas and the VAT was
 
earlier suggested by Malandra and Tanaka. See Malandra 
1996: 76; Tanaka 2018: 77–78.
92. See Amoghavajra’s works T 297 and T 972. On  probably meant to employ the power of the bo -
dhisattvas to magnify the efficiency of the prayers. 
According to the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra, the mantras 
and maṇḍala of th e eight great bodhisattvas are 
effective in fulfillment of one’s wishes, eradicating 
one’s sins, setting one on the path to swift enlight-enment and protection from harm.
93
I believe that, although the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra 
is the ultimate source for the V AEGB group, the 
depiction of V AEGB in Yulin Cave 25  is not a 
maṇḍala, as the bod hisattvas do not encircle the 
central figure, and is actually based on another 
work by Amoghavajra entitled Puxian pusa xing 
yuan zan (Ch. 普賢菩薩行願贊 ) (T 297).94 The text 
was composed between 756  and 774  and consists 
of four parts, where the first part is a translation 
of the Samantabhadracaryāpra ṇidhānar āja (Ch. 
普賢行願品 ), also known as the Bhadracarī ;95 the 
second part is a eulogy to the eight great bodhisat -
tvas, which is a part of the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra  
(T 1167 ); and the third and final parts are a dhāra ṇī 
and a praise of this dhāra ṇī.
In sho
rt, the work includes the cult of the eight 
great bodhisattvas of the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra 
into the practice of the Bhadracarī , an immensely 
popular aspirational prayer, in which one vows to 
worship the buddhas and become enlightened for 
the sake of all beings. 
The Bhadracarī is known as an independent 
work and as the final part of the Ga ṇḍavyūhasūtra  
(Ch. 入法界品 ),96 which itself is a part of the Ava-
Amoghavajra’s ritual manual for the U ṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇī 
sūtra (T 972), see Wang 2018: 47–50; Lin 2014: 139–143. 
Amoghavajra produced the manual in 764 and it became 
the most influential redaction in Tang China (several earlier 
redactions are also known, including the one by Śubhā -
karasiṃha). The manual introduces a ma ṇḍala known in 
Japanese Buddhism as Sonshō Ma ṇḍala in the Amogha-  
vajra tradition. This ma ṇḍala is similar to the ma ṇḍala of 
the eight great bodhisattvas of the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra, 
but, in addition, it includes two wrathful deities, Acala  
and Trailokyavijaya. See Tanaka 2018: 88, 95. 
93. Granoff 1968/1969: 2; Geoffrey Goble, private com -
munication, 25 July 2018.
94. On this t
ext, see Dessein 2003.
95. The Bhad
racarī is discussed  in Osto 2010.
96. The Bha
dracarī is included in the translation of the 
Gaṇḍavy
ūhasūtra made by Prajña (Ch. 般若 ), which was 
finished in 798 and was based on the Sanskrit copy that 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   82 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 87] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 83
taṃsakasūtra (Ch.華嚴經 ), a core scripture of the 
Avataṃsaka (Ch.華嚴  Huayan) Buddhist tradi -
tion.97 According to modern scholarship, the Vai-
rocana of Esoteric Buddhism developed from the 
Vairocana of the Avataṃsakasūtra, who is featured 
in the sūtra under the special name of Rocana (Ch. 
盧舍那  Locana). The Huayan tradition integrated 
various Esoteric teachings, and the Huayan Vairo-
cana and the Vairocana of Esoteric Buddism were 
sometimes ‘fused iconographically’ .98
The image of Vairocana in Yulin Cave 25  is an 
example of such fusion. A cartouche next to it con-
tains the Chinese inscription 清淨法身盧那舍佛  
(the Pure Dharmakāya Locana Buddha), which is 
the name of the Vairocana of the Avataṃsakasūtra.99 
Thus, we have Locana Buddha accompanied by the 
eight great bodhisattvas of the Aṣṭama ṇḍalak asūtra. 
This combination corresponds to the Puxian  
pusa xing yuan zan (Ch. 普賢菩薩行願贊 )  
(T 297), where the eight great bodhisattvas of the  
Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra are unders tood as guardians 
of Locana of the Avataṃsakasūtra.100 Therefore, 
the Yulin 25  painting (Fig. 3.1 ) represents the 
deities of the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra in the Huayan 
context. In contrast with the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra, 
which prescribes a strictly circular layout for the 
bodhisattvas, the Puxian  pusa xing yuan zan does 
not provide any guidance in this regard. I believe, 
this explains a variety of spatial arrangements 
found in the representations of the group (dis -
cussed below).
Furthermore, not only the central composition, 
but also the whole iconographic programme of 
Yulin Cave 25  can be understood in the Huayan 
context. First of all, the characteristic Huayan 
depictions of Mañjuśrī, Samantabhadra, and 
had been presented to the Chinese emperor by the King of 
Odisha. The extant Tibetan translation of the Ga ṇḍavyūh a 
was made during the imperial period and also concludes 
with the Bhadracarī.  See Osto 2010: 2–3.
97. See Cle
ary 1993 for a translation of the sūtra .
98. Orzec
h, Sørensen, and Payne 2011: 91–92.
99. Wang noted that the characters na  那 and she  舍 
have been transposed. See Wang 2018: 109–110.
100. Desse
in 2003: 332. As was noted by Wang, Dessein 
mistakenly replaces bodhisattva Sarvanivāraṇaviṣkambhin 
with Acalanātha, see Wang 2018: 258, n. 59.Sudhana occupy the western wall.101 The depic-
tions of Amitābha and Maitreya’s Pure Lands as 
a pair are common in Dunhuang art and their 
compositions are based on respective sūtra s.102 
However, their presence in Cave 25  might reflect 
an additional level of symbolism. For example, 
aspiration for rebirth in Amitābha’s Pure land is 
emphasized in the Bhadracarī,103 while Maitreya 
is one of the most important spiritual friends of 
Sudhana, who visits Maitreya’s abode in the nar -
rative of the Ga ṇḍavyūhasūtra. Therefore, Yulin 
Cave 25 can be regarded as a manifestation of the 
donor’s practice of the Bhadracarī and of their as-
piration for enlightenment.
As a matter of fact, references to the Bhadra -
carī and/or the Ga ṇḍavyū hasūtra can be found in 
almost all representations of V AEGB in Hexi and 
Tibet.104 
A Wooden Shrine
One striking example is a wooden shrine from 
the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Arts (Fig. 3.7 ). The 
shrine has attracted considerable scholarly atten -
tion and was variously ascribed to Central Asia, 
Kashmir, or Tibet.105 On stylistic grounds, I argue 
that it most likely originates from Hexi, as is evident 
from Chinese facial features of the figures, the com -
101. For these images, see Khokhlov 2019: fig. 2. Paired 
images of Mañjuśrī and Samantabhadra, the major bodhi -
sattvas of the Huayan tradition, were often depicted in 
Dunhuang caves starting from the early Tang dynasty. 
According to Wang, this pair reflects the interest in the 
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra nar rative and  the Bhadracarī . See Wang 
2018: 247.
102. For exa
mple, Mogao Caves 329 and 321. See Wang 
2005: 382–386. 
103. Osto 20
10: 5–6.
104. This also finds parallels at Borobudur (early 9th 
century), Java. Panel IV-3 from the Ga ṇḍavyūha reliefs 
contains images of Sudhana and the eight great bodhisattvas. 
See Bautze-Picron 1997: 28, 54 schema 11; Fontein 2012:  
173; Long 2009: 165–168. I am very grateful to Claudine 
Bautze-Picron for drawing my attention to the Borobudur 
depiction and providing these references.
105. The most notable publications include Granoff  
1968/1969; Linrothe 2014; Wang 2018. While Granoff as -
cribes the shrine to Central Asia, Linrothe suggests a Kash-
miri provenance, and Wang argues for a Tibetan origin.  
See Granoff 1968/1969: 81; Linrothe 2014: 31; Wang 2018: 83.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   83 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 88] ---
Yury Khokhlov84
bination of the Indian and Chinese artistic modes, 
and spiked armbands worn by Vairocana, which 
is a characteristic of the Southern Indian mode in 
Hexi art (see a close-up of the armband in Fig. 3.7 ). 
The central section of the shrine shows Vairocana 
flanked by two vertical rows of four bodhisattvas, 
who altogether most likely represent the eight great 
bodhisattvas.106 Such a layout can be found in South -
ern Indian art from the 6 th century o nward and this 
particular group is depicted in the same manner in 
stone stele from Odisha, which has been tentatively 
dated to the 9 th or 10 th century.107 In the shrine, 
three more figures are placed below the figure of 
Vairocana. While Granoff and Wang identify this 
group as a representation of an abhiṣeka ceremo-
ny, Linrothe argues that it depicts a donor of the 
shrine being blessed by the bodhisattvas.108 I would 
106. They were identified as such by Granoff. See Granoff 
1968/1969: 90–91.
107. For 6th
-century examples in Cave 23 at Nasik, see 
Bautze-Picron 2000: figs. 9–10. For the Odisha stele, see 
Bautze-Picron 1997: 27, 53 schema 10; Tanaka 2018: fig. 1.15.
108. Granoff 1968/1969: 90; Linrothe 2014: 31; Wang  
2018: 72.argue that this group likely symbolizes Sudhana’s 
spiritual path towards enlightenment. The two bo-
dhisattvas thus represent Mañjuśrī (on the left) and 
Samantabhadra (on the right), who together with 
a central figure of Vairocana (here the Vairocana 
of the  Avataṃsakasūtra) form the typical trinity 
of Huayan Buddhism. Therefore, a figure seated on a rug represents Sudhana, who is customarily 
depicted in Chinese art as a little boy with a shaven 
head.109 Accordingly, the depiction of Sudhana 
together with Mañjuśrī and Samantabhadra sym-
bolizes his spiritual journey as described in the 
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra; in his search for enlighten -
ment, Sudhana meets fifty-three spiritual fiends 
(kalyānamitra)  starting from Mañjuśrī and ending 
with Samantabhadra.110 At the same time, these 
three are part of the final stage of Sudhana’s pil -
grimage, which culminates in the pronouncement 
of the  Bhadracarī. Before his final meeting with 
109. On representations of Sudhana in Chinese art, see 
Font
ein 1968: 23–110.
110. The representations of Mañjuśrī, Samantabhadra 
and Sūdhana in Yulin Cave 25 most likely have the same 
meaning, see fn. 101.
Fig. 3.7: Traveling Shrine of Vairocana and Eight Bodhisattvas on a Garbhadhātu ma ṇḍala, Chinese, 9th or 10th 
century CE, Tan
g Dynasty (618–906 CE). Sandalwood (?) with traces of polychromy and brass paint, opened: 
12 1/4 × 14 inches (31.1 × 35.6 cm). The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, Kansas City, Missouri. Purchase: William 
Rockhill Nelson Trust, 44–18. Photo: Joshua Ferdinand. Right: close-up of Vairocana’s armband.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   84 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 89] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 85
Samantabhadra, the boy sees Mañjuśrī again and 
receives from him various kinds of teachings.111 
In our composition, Mañjuśrī is shown offering 
Sudhana a round object. A depiction of this 
meeting can be also found in a wall painting in 
Mogao Cave 85  (late 9 th century), where it is 
identified by an accompanying cartouche.112 There 
Mañjuśrī is also depicted offering Sudhana a round 
object. This object probably represents the jewel of 
the teaching, references to which can be found in 
the sūtra. For example, during their first meeting, 
Sudhana supplicates to Mañjuśrī: ‘Instruct me, O 
King, with the jewel of the wheel of teaching’ .113 
Properly prepared by Mañjuśrī, Sudhana sees Sa-
mantabhadra, who is depicted in the shrine with 
his right hand placed upon Sudhana’s head.114 The 
crucial moment of their meeting, which takes 
place at the feet of Vairocana/Locana (exactly as 
shown in the shrine) and culminates in the pro-
nouncement of the Bhadracarī, is described in the 
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra as follows:
Just as in this world, in the presence of Vairoca -
na Buddha, the enlightening being Universally 
Good (bodhisattva Samantabhadra) extended 
his right hand and laid it on Sudhana’s head 
… And just as facets of truth entered Sudhana 
as he was touched by the hand of Universally 
Good at the feet of Vairocana Buddha, like -
wise facets of truth entered Sudhana in various 
ways as he was touched by the multitudes of 
hands extended from the bodies of all the Uni -
versally Goods.115
I believe that an image of the elephant, Samanta-  
bhadra’s vehicle, placed in the centre of the Vairo-
cana’s throne is a reference to the enlightenment 
and the Bhadracarī. Douglas Osto suggested that 
111. Cleary 1993: 1502.
112. Wang 20
18: 250, fig. 119.
113. Clear
y 1993: 1175.
114. A simil
ar representation of the scene where Saman- 
tabhadra  lays his hand on Sudhana’s head can be found 
in the Ga ṇḍavyūha  nar rative panels located on the east 
wall on the fourth level at Borobudur, panel IVB-82. See 
https://www.photodharma.net/Indonesia/11-Gandavyuha-  
Level-4/11-Gandavyuha-Level-4.htm, picture 82; Fontein 
2012: 147, fig. 33.
115. Clear
y 1993: 1508.Samantabhadra and the Bhadracarī were ‘associat -
ed with each other in the sense that Samantabhad-
ra is thought to embody the aspirations contained 
in the verses.’116 In addition, and as was pointed 
out to me by Claudine Bautze-Picron, lion(s) and 
elephant(s) form a pair which is often encountered 
in the ornamentation of the pedestal of throne 
in India from an early period. The meaning im -
parted to the two animals is rich, but, in short, an 
elephant refers to the enlightenment and a lion to 
the teaching.117 
The Nelson-Atkins shrine carries an unobtru -
sive and mostly illegible Tibetan inscription on the 
back. It opens with an initial Tibetan mark (yig 
mgo) followed by the syllables byang chub . Ac -
cording to Rob Lonrothe, these syllables may have 
originally stood for the words ‘awakening’ (byang 
chub ), ‘bodhicitta’ (byang chub sems), ‘bodhisat -
tva’ (byang chub sems dpa’), which would match 
the suggested symbolism of the central scene. Ac-
cording to Y annick Laurent, the syllables may have 
alternatively stood for a personal Tibetan name 
(i.e. Jangchub).118 It has to be also noted that there 
is no way to know when and where the inscription 
was added and its presence per se does not signify 
a Tibetan provenance of the shrine. It merely sug-
gests that the shrine was at some point used by 
Tibetan-speaking people.119
116. Osto 2010: 5.
117. Bautz
e-Picron, personal communication, 9 August 
2019. This symbolism is also evident in the Huayan art 
where a lion is the vehicle of Mañjuśrī, an embodiment of 
the teaching, while an elephant is the vehicle of Samant -
abhadra, an embodiment of the enlightenment. On the 
symbolism of these two animals in Indian art, see Bautze-
Picron 2008.
118. Linrothe 2014: 31–34; Yannick Laurent, personal 
communication, August 2019. Laurent further remarked 
that the foreign provenance of this Buddhist shrine and 
its now effaced epigraph make it difficult to determine the 
nature of this Tibetan inscription. In comparison with 
other non-Tibetan portable images bearing Tibetan in -
scriptions, the epigraph of the shrine may have acted as 
a laudatory inscription, a descriptive caption, or even as 
an expression of ownership, as shown by Laurent during 
his presentation at the 15th Seminar of the International 
Association for Tibetan Studies in Paris, July 2019.
119. See fn. 4
7.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   85 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 90] ---
Yury Khokhlov86
A Portable Painting from Mogao Cave 17
Another version of the group of V AEGB can be 
found in a portable painting from Mogao Cave 
17, which can be dated to the late 9 th century on 
stylistic grounds (Fig. 3.8 ).120 The bodhisattvas are 
partially identified by Tibetan inscriptions and par -
tially by iconographic attributes. As with the Yulin 
painting (Fig. 3.1 ), the figures display all defining 
characteristics of the Southern Indian artistic mode. 
The layout of the composition is the same as that 
in the central section of the Nelson-Atkins shrine 
(Fig. 3.7) and that in the aforementioned stele from 
Odisha.121 The bottom foreground of the painting 
contains representations of sand hills and birds 
which are normally associated with depictions of 
Amitābha’s Pure Land. As mentioned above, the 
Bhadracarī contains a reference to Amitābha’s Pure 
Land that perhaps explains why its features are de-
picted in the painting.122
Eastern Tibetan Rock Carvings
There are three rock carvings in Eastern Tibet that 
depict a group of V AEGB (Fig. 3.9–3.11 ).123 They 
have often been offered as evidence for the Tibetan 
provenance of the composition in Yulin Cave 25 .124 
The carvings are concentrated in the areas border -
ing China and date to the early 9 th century. At least 
two, if not all, of them were commissioned by the 
120. For an overview of the scholarship and the latest 
discussion on the painting, see Wang 2018: 111–113.
121. See fn. 1
04.
122. This was noted by Michelle Wang as well. See Wang 
2018: 258, n. 59.
123. For an ov
erview of the carvings, see Huo 2018.
1) Renda (also known as Ldan ma brag) high relief 
rock carving, dated 804/816, Brag gyab County, Chamdo 
Prefecture of TAR (Fig. 9). On this carving see Heller 1994; 
Shanxi Province Academy of Archaeology and TAR Relics 
Preservation Institute 2014.
2) Sgar thog high relief rock carving, near the town of 
Sgar thog in Smar khams county, Chamdo Prefecture of 
TAR (Fig. 10). On this carving, see Yang, Lu and Zhang 2017.
3) ’Bis khog (also known as Bimda) high relief rock 
carving, dated 806, Yushu Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, 
Qinghai province (Fig. 11). On the most recent research on 
this carving and for an overview of the previous scholar -
ship, see Huo 2017.
124. See fn. 5
4.same person—Y e shes dbyangs, who was identified 
as a high-profile Tibetan monk listed in a Chan 
lineage in the later Dunhuang texts, and who, ac-
cording to an inscription accompanying the Renda 
group, commissioned many other carvings in the 
area.125 Altogether this strongly suggests that the 
carvings were created under cultural influence of 
the Hexi Corridor.126 
I argue that these rock carvings are associated 
with the Bhadracarī and, like the examples from 
Hexi, reflect the practice established by Amogha- 
vajra in the Puxian  pusa xing yuan zan (T 297). 
This can be supported by the fact that a complete 
text of the Bhadracarī is carved about 100  metres 
away from the group of VAEGB at ’Bis khog.127 The 
inscription is considered part of the monument 
and covers a large portion of the rock that gives 
it an exceptional prominence at the site. In ad-
dition, a prayer to Vairocana and the eight great 
bodhisattvas is carved in twenty-three lines to the 
right of the group of VAEGB at the same cite.128 
This prayer corresponds to the eulogy to the eight 
great bodhisattvas in Amoghavajra’s text. At Renda, 
a single religious text accompanies the group of 
VAEGB. It was initially identified as an excerpt 
from the Bhadracarī, but this was questioned by 
Amy Heller.129 At present, the text is understood to 
be a short prayer, probably a local creation, which 
focuses on the bodhisattva Samantabhadra and is 
inspired by the Bhadracarī.130 
In addition, the historical inscriptions at Renda 
and ’Bis khog have clear references to the main 
qualities of the Bhadracarī. They praise the path 
to enlightenment and dedicate the monuments to 
the well-being of the Tibetan Emperor, tsenpo (Tib. 
btsan po).131 Sam van Schaik and Lewis Doney have 
shown that the  Bhadracarī was one of the most 
125. Heller 1994; On Ye shes dbyangs, see also van Schaik 
2015: 163–174.
126. Huo Wei 
also argues that these carvings should be 
understood in the context of the Sino-Tibetan relations, 
see Huo 2018.
127. Huo 2017
: 6–7.
128. Ibid.
: 5.
129. Helle
r 1994: n. 6.
130. Shanxi Province Academy of Archaeology and TAR 
Relics Preservation Institute 2014: 14.
131. Helle
r 1994; Huo 2017: 6.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   86 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 91] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 87
Fig. 3.8: Vairocana and the eight great bodhisattvas, ink and colour on silk, 9th or 10th century, 
from Mogao Cave 17, 63.5 × 17.95 cm, the British Museum, 1919,0101,0.50 (with the permission of 
the British Museum).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   87 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 92] ---
Yury Khokhlov88
popular Buddhist prayers in Imperial Tibet and 
that it was understood as having the power to give 
the tsenpo longevity. Since many Tibetan copies 
of the prayer were found among the Dunhuang 
manuscripts, the authors have remarked that 
its popularity among Tibetans might have been 
due to Chinese influence.132 Indeed, even the link 
between the Bhadracarī and the tsenpo finds par -
allels in Chinese practice, as Amoghavajra’s trans-
lation of the Bhadracarī was intended as a eulogy 
to the Chinese emperor as well.133 Furthermore, 
out of three extant Chinese translations, the one 
by Amoghavajra most closely corresponds to the 
Tibetan version.134 
Regarding artistic features, the groups of 
V AEGB in the carvings were depicted either in 
the Tibetan mode, with the figures clad in Tibet-
an-style robes (Figs. 3.10  and 3.11 ), or in the Indian 
mode (Fig. 3.9 ).135 The iconography of the group 
132. van Schaik and Doney 2007: 185, n. 19.
133. Desse
in 2003: 331–332.
134. Osto 20
10: 2.
135. It is diffi
cult to go beyond this general observation, 
as in their current state ’Bis khog and Renda carvings are 
freshly plastered and painted, while the Sgar thog carving 
is significantly damaged. Initially, the reliefs were likely 
covered with plaster, in which smaller details were made. Fig. 3.11: Sketch of Sgar thog high relief rock carving, 
early 9th century, near the town of Sgar thog, Smar 
khams county, Chamdo prefecture of TAR, China 
(sketch by Y ang Qingfan, with the permission of the 
author and Journal of Tibetology , courtesy of Zhang 
Changhong).
Fig. 3.10: Sketch of Bis khog (Bimda) high relief rock 
carving, dated 806, Yulshul, Tibetan autonomous 
prefecture, Qinghai province, China (sketch by Tang 
Huisheng, courtesy of Zhang Changhong).Fig. 3.9: Sketch of Renda (Ldan ma brag) high relief 
rock carving, dated 804/816, Zhangyab county, 
Chamdo prefecture of TAR, China (sketch by Shage 
Wangdui, courtesy of Zhang Changhong). 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   88 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 93] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 89
of V AEGB in the carvings corresponds to the 
Southern Indian and Hexi examples (Vairocana is 
shown with the dhyāna -mudrā). Compositionally, 
the Renda group is organized in the same way as 
the group in a portable painting from Mogao Cave 
17 (Fig. 3.8 ) and in the stele from Odisha.136 It dis-
plays typical elements of Chinese design such as 
the canopy above the central figure, which is almost 
identical to those in the Hexi examples (Fig. 3.1 and 
Khokhlov 2019 : fig. 5 ), and two apsaras es flying 
on Chinese-style clouds. The two other carvings 
follow the layout of the composition in Yulin Cave 
25, though the bodhisattvas are depicted standing, 
as they are depicted at Ellora. Discussion on the 
transmission of the cult of V AEGB from Hexi to 
Tibet will continue in Part 4. 
Summary of Section 2.1
The depictions of VAEGB in Hexi and Eastern Tibet 
most likely reflect the popularity of the Bhadracarī. 
Thus, the central figure in these depictions repre-
sents the Vairocana of the Avataṃsakasūtra, whose 
iconography was fused with that of the Vairocana of 
the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra. The connection between 
the Bhadracarī and the Aṣṭama ṇḍalaka sūtra was 
established in Amoghavajra’s work the Puxian pusa 
xing yuan zan (T 297), which integrated the eight 
great bodhisattvas of the Aṣṭama ṇḍalakasūtra into 
the practice of the Bhadracarī. The Southern Indian 
stylistic elements detected in the Hexi depictions 
correspond to the context of Amoghavajra’s teach-
ings and, by extension, suggest a Southern Indian 
origin of the cult of VAEGB in Hexi. The Tibetan 
occupation of the Hexi Corridor in the mid-8th 
century enabled religious and artistic transmission 
from this region to Tibet. In this regard, the dis -
cussed eastern Tibetan rock carvings bear material 
witness of that process. 
2.2 maṇḍala-like compositions 
feat
uring vairocanābhisambodhi
At both Mogao and Yulin, Vairocanābhisambodhi  
is consistently depicted in the Southern Indian 
Such details could have been lost over time and/or altered 
during subsequent renovations. 
136. See fn. 1
07.mode. Figure 3.12 shows a ma ṇḍala-like com-  
position137 from Mogao Cave 14 dating to the 
9th century. Similar compositions can be found 
in Yulin Cave 20, and Yulin Cave 38 dating from 
the 10th to 11th centuries.138 The compositions 
feature Vairocanābhisambodhi surrounded by 
bodhisattvas, Offering Goddesses, gatekeepers 
and/or guardians of directions. Each of these 
maṇḍalas is accompanied by a second ma ṇḍala 
in the same style, which are depicted on the same 
or opposite walls and centred around Vajrasattva 
in Mogao Cave 14 (Fig. 3.13 ) and a Buddha in the 
two other caves. Textual sources behind these twin 
maṇḍalas have not been identified.139 What is clear, 
however, is that they display iconography similar 
to that of basic ma ṇḍalas of the Yoga tradition that, 
for instance, can be recognized by the presence 
of such distinctive deities as four or eight Offer -
ing Goddesses, who sometimes can be depicted 
in male forms as Offering Bodhisattvas (marked 
137. Although these compositions look like  maṇḍalas, it 
is not clear if they were created and used in a ritual context 
that established their function as ma ṇḍalas. For a defini-
tion of maṇḍala, see Orzech, Sørensen, and Payne 2011:  
81–82.
138. See Khok
hlov 2019: figs. 16, 17; for a review of the 
scholarship and a discussion on these compositions as well 
as for additional images, see Wang 2018: 156–168, figs. 28, 
29, 72, 73, 74, 80, 81. On the ground of their style, Wang 
ascribes these depictions to the Tibetan tradition. She 
designates them as ‘Maṇḍala of eight great bodhisattvas’ 
and groups them together with the previously discussed 
depictions of VAEGB. In my view, this can be misleading, 
as the ma ṇḍala  of t
he eight great bodhisattvas contains 
only nine deities and is based on the  Aṣṭama ṇḍalak asūtra. 
Compositions with more deities are based on different texts 
and can feature eight different bodhisattvas. Moreover, 
the eight bodhisattvas in the ma ṇḍala  of t he Aṣṭama ṇḍa-
lakasūtra are not the same eight bodhisattvas as those 
found in ma ṇḍala s of t he Yoga tradition, to which the 
discussed examples most likely belong.  On the latter group 
of bodhisattvas, see Tanaka 2018: 194–195.
139. The central deities in the ma ṇḍala s in Y ulin Cave 20 
are identified by accompanying inscriptions, which give 
the same name ‘the pure dharmakāya  Vairocana Buddha’ 
(qingjing fashen Piluzhena fo 清淨法身毘盧遮那佛 ), see 
Wang 2018: 165. The name Piluzhena fo corresponds to 
the name of Vairocana in the eight-fascicle translation of 
the Avataṃsakasūtra  (T 279: 39a 17-18), see Wang 2018: 109. 
Similarly to the case of Yulin Cave 25, this likely reflects 
adaptation of Esoteric teachings for the Huayan context.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   89 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 94] ---
Yury Khokhlov90
Fig. 3.12: Ma ṇḍala-like composition centred around Vairocana, wall painting, second half of the 9th 
century, G
uiyijun period (848–1036), Mogao Cave 14, China (with the permission of the Dunhuang 
Academy); circles indicate Offering Goddesses. Right: close-up of the central figure of Vairocana.
Fig. 3.13: Ma ṇḍala-li
ke composition centred around Vajrasattva, wall painting, second half of the 9th 
century, Guiyijun period (848–1036), Mogao Cave 14, Gansu Province, China (with the permission of 
the Dunhuang Academy). Right: close-up of the central figure of Vajrasattva.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   90 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 95] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 91
by circles in the images).140 For example, Cave 14 
has the paired ma ṇḍala-like compositions centred 
around Vairocanābhisambodhi (Fig. 3
.12) and Va-
jrasattva (Fig. 3.13 ). Somewhat similar ma ṇḍalas 
with the same central deities are described in 
Amoghavajra’s translation of the Adhyardhaśatikā 
Prajnāpāramitāsūtra (Ch. 般若理趣經 ) (T 743 ). Ac -
cording to Kimiaki Tanaka, who uses the alterna-
tive title Prajnāpāramitānayasūtra for the text, this 
sūtra is the oldest in the Yoga cycle and it greatly 
influenced the development of the other texts, in-
cluding the STTS.141 Thus, it is clear that there is 
a strong affiliation between the Southern Indian 
artistic mode and the Yoga tradition.
2.3 seated amoghapāśa with four 
arms
There are three portable paintings from Mogao 
Cave 17, which depict ma ṇḍalas  centred on seated 
Amoghapāśa with four arms.142
The painting in Fig. 3.14 is traditionally dated 
to the 8 th or 9 th century.143 While four-armed 
Amoghapāśa in the centre is identified by a noose 
held in the upper left hand, the presence of four 
Offering Goddesses (marked by circles) points to 
the context of the Y oga teachings.144
Amoghapāśa is an Esoteric variant of Ava-
lokiteśvara; he can manifest in different forms, in-
cluding peaceful and wrathful, standing and seated, 
140. On the Offering Goddesses as features of the basic 
maṇḍala s of t
he Yoga cycle, see Tanaka 2018: 279–288.
141. On the ma ṇḍala s of t his sūtra,  see Tanaka 2018: 
248–280 and Hunter 2018. The first and second ma ṇḍala s 
described in the text are centred around Vairocanābhisam -
bodhi (21 deities) and Vajrasattva (17 deities), respectively. 
There are versions where the second ma ṇḍala  is c entred on 
a Buddha instead of Vajrasattva (Tanaka 2018: 204), which 
corresponds to examples in Yulin Caves 20 and 38. In Cave 
14, the central deities of the ma ṇḍala s ar e swapped, with 
the Vairocanābhisambodhi ma ṇḍala co ntaining 17 deities 
and the Vajrasattva ma ṇḍala  co ntaining 21 deities .
142. The paintings were discussed by Kimiaki Tanaka, 
who relates two of them to the Yoga tradition; see Tanaka 
2000: 39–71.
143. The pain
ting was discussed by Karl Debreczeny in 
Brauen 1997: 80–81, where its Indianized style was ascribed 
to Tibetan influence.
144. See fn. 1
40.with four, six, eight or more arms, and so on. There 
are nine Chinese translations of several versions 
of the  Amoghapāśadhāra ṇīsūt ra dating from the 
7th to 10 th centuries, including one by Amogha- 
vajra.145 Iconographic descriptions are rarely given 
in the texts and it is often simply mentioned that 
Amoghapāśa looks like Śiva.146 This probably ex-
plains the great variety of his iconographic forms, 
145. Wong 2007a: 152.
146. Reis-Ha
bito 1999: 48.Fig. 3.14: Ma ṇḍala of Amoghapāśa, mid-8th century, 
from Mogao C
ave 17, 204.5 × 107.5 cm with mount, the 
Guimet museum, MG26466; circles indicate Offering 
Goddesses. (Photo © RMN-Grand Palais, MNAAG, 
Paris/Mathieu Ravaux).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   91 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 96] ---
Yury Khokhlov92
since Śiva has many iconographic forms as well. At 
the same time, at least three translations mention 
Amoghapāśa with one head and four arms.147 
Amoghapāśa (see close-up in Fig. 3.16 ) and his 
retinue in our painting are depicted in the Southern 
Indian mode. Although no comparable Southern 
Indian images of Amoghapāśa are known, there 
are many contemporaneous images of four-armed 
Śiva seated with one leg pendant. These images 
can represent different forms of Śiva depending on 
the presence or absence of accompanying figures, 
hand gestures, and attributes. A late Pallava sculp-
ture of Viṣāpaharaṇa Śiva in Fig. 3.15  is very close 
147. These are the translations by Maṇicintana (Ch. 寶思
惟; 693), Li Wuchan (Ch. 李無諂 ; 670), and Bodhiruci (Ch.
菩提流支 ; 707–709). See Reis-Habito 1999: 52.to Amoghapāśa in the painting. Both figures have 
three eyes and are adorned with almost identical 
armbands decorated with spikes. The similarities in 
their proportions and in the position of the second 
pair of the arms are striking.
I discussed the two other ma ṇḍalas executed in 
the Sothern Indian mode elsewhere.148 They likely 
belong to the 10th century and display some icono-
graphic and stylistic variations in comparison with 
the earlier example in Fig. 3.14 . Nevertheless, the 
deities in the paintings show distinctive elements 
of the Southern Indian mode (spiked decorations, 
swagged necklaces) as well. 
148. Khokhlov 2019: 87–88, figs. 20–21.
Fig. 3.15: Viṣāpaharaṇa Śiva, 9th century, Pallava period, 
copper alloy, H 62 cm, Government Museum, Chennai, 
Tamil Nadu, India (photo by the American Institute of 
Indian Studies, negative no. 648.97).Fig. 3.16: Close-up of the central figure of 
Amoghapāśa, detail of Fig. 3.14.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   92 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 97] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 93
Fig. 3.17: Kubera with attendants, wall painting, Tibetan period, Yulin Cave 15, China (with the 
permission of the Dunhuang Academy).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   93 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 98] ---
Yury Khokhlov94
2.4 yulin cave 15
Yulin Cave 15  also contains a composition executed 
in the Southern Indian mode (Fig. 3.17 ).149 It fea -
tures yakṣas (a class of demigods) known under 
various names, including Kubera and Vaiśravaṇa.150 
In India, Kubera is the guardian of the North in a 
group of the eight dikpāla s (guardians of the eight 
directions) and the king of various demigods.151 In 
China, he is mostly known as Vaiśravaṇa (Ch. 多
聞天王 ), the guardian of the North in a group of 
the four heavenly kings.152 Vaiśravaṇa is tradition-
ally depicted in an armoured form, which proba-
bly has a Central Asian origin.153 In Cave 15 , the 
deity is represented as a yakṣa holding a club and 
a mongoose that corresponds to the iconography 
of Kubera.
Close parallels can be found amongst sculp-
tures of yakṣas at Ellora, two of which are shown 
in Fig. 3.18 . These and many other similar exam -
ples belong to Ellora’s Jain caves.154 Lisa Owen has 
recently discovered that these caves reflect the pa-
tronage of Jains from the regions of Tamil Nadu and 
Karnataka.155 This observation corresponds to the 
Pallava-influenced style of the sculptures. Owen 
has remarked that only a few comparable depic-
tions survived in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka,156 and 
thus the Ellora sculptures are especially valuable 
in order to reconstruct artistic traditions of these 
regions. This provides additional evidence for a 
probable Tamil Nadu background of the discussed 
Yulin painting. In terms of iconography, images 
of Brahmanic, Buddhist and Jain yakṣas represent 
149. Sha Wutian argues that the painting is executed in 
the Ti
betan style. See Sha 2013: 117–118.
150. While the etymology of the former is debatable, the 
latter derives from the name of his father Viśravis. On yakṣa  
cult and iconography, see Misra 1981; Bautze-Picron 2002. 
In particular, on Kubera/Vaiśravaṇa, see Misra 1981: 59–71.
151. On the iconography and symbolism of the guardians 
of the directions ( dikpālas)  in India, see Wessels-Mevissen 
2001.
152. On the iconography and symbolism of the four heav -
enly kings in Central and East Asia, see Shim 2013.
153. Shim 20
13: 82–112.
154. On Ell
ora’s Jain caves, see Owen 2012. In particular, 
on depictions of yakṣa s at Ellora, see ibid .: 81–127.
155. Ibid.: 16, 2
0, 160–163. 
156. Ibid. : 4
–5.a shared concept of wealth and protection and 
display only minor differences.157 
Like the Yulin Kubera, the Ellora yakṣas are 
placed under an arched canopy formed by a tree 
with luxuriant foliage and flowers. Such design 
with a tree as part of a throne back and luxuriant 
foliage depicted above a divinity is unusual for the 
art of the Deccan, but is common in the examples 
from Tamil Nadu.158 The figures are seated with one 
leg pendant and flanked by two attendants, one of 
which (on the right) carries a purse made of mon-
goose skin. In contrast with the Ellora yakṣas, the 
Yulin Kubera is seated on a throne.159 Nevertheless, 
both figures are similarly decorated with swagged 
necklaces as well as with spiked crowns and arm-
bands. Additionally, the right image in Fig. 3.18 
and the Yulin Kubera have almost identical square 
backrests and halos of an inverted U-shape.
The appearance of such Kubera images in Hexi 
could be related to protective rituals centred on 
Vaiśravaṇa, rituals which Amoghavajra regularly 
performed to provide imperial troops with super -
natural assistance. The earliest recorded instance 
of Amoghavajra performing the Vaiśravaṇa rituals 
is specifically linked to the Tibetan siege of Liang-
zhou.160 There are five texts in the Taishō Canon at-
tributed to him that specifically invoke Vaiśravaṇa 
for military magic.161 In these texts, he is consist -
ently referred to as a king of yakṣas. Frustratingly, 
his physical appearance is not always described and 
where it is given, the description is of his armoured 
157. Ibid. : 127– 129; Bautze-Picron 2002.
158. I am grateful to Claudine Bautze-Picron for drawing 
my attention to this feature. Comparable examples can 
be found in the Jain rock carvings at Kalugumalai, Tamil 
Nadu, in the 9th or early 10th century, see Owen 2010: figs. 
3, 11. Also, see a 9th-century Buddha from Tamil Nadu, now 
in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (accession numbers 
1970.3 and 67.4a-b); and a 10th-century Buddha with two 
bodhisattvas, from Nāgapaṭṭinam, Tamil Nadu, now in the 
Government Museum Chennai (accession number 81212).
159. Kuber
a seated on a throne is depicted in the early 
8th-century Ellora Cave 25, but the image is significantly 
damaged. See Owen 2012: fig. 57.
160. Yang 20
18: 86–87.
161. These rituals and texts have been discussed in  
Goble 2013.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   94 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 99] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 95
Fig. 3.18: Yakṣas with attendants, early 9th century, Ellora Cave 32, Maharashtra, India (photograph by the 
American Institute of Indian Studies, negative no. 442.45, 441.9).
form.162 However, the Yulin Kubera is shown with 
the same two attendants as those that are normal-
ly depicted with Vaiśravaṇa in Dunhuang art.163 
This suggests that, despite the differences in ico -
nography, he was understood to be the same god as 
Vaiśravaṇa.164 It can be assumed that the aforemen -
162. Geoffrey Goble, personal communication, 23 July 
2018.
163. See, fo
r example, a woodblock print dated to 947 in 
the British Museum collection (1919,0101,0.245). The atten -
dants are a female deity with a tray of jewels (identified by 
the museum as Goddess Śrī) and a gandharva (a class of 
demigods) wearing a tiger-head helmet that covers his head 
and shoulders. On depictions of gandharva s in Chinese art,  
see Wong 2018: 73, fig. 2.14, 120, fig. 3.8. Another example 
of Vaiśravaṇa attended by a gandharva  is a 9th-century 
painting in the British Museum collection (1919,0101,0.38). 
164. The conflation between the dikpālas and the heavenly 
kings is also evident in the compositions in Figs. 3.12 and 3.13. 
While the North, South, and West directions are guarded tioned protective rituals were of an Indian origin 
and therefore they must have been initially centred 
on Kubera, whose images likely accompanied the 
original Indian texts, but whose name was replaced 
with its popular local equivalent, Vaiśravaṇa, in the 
Chinese translations. 
2.5 portable paintings with solitary 
figu
res of bodhisattvas
Fig. 3.19 shows a solitary standing bodhisattva 
painted in the Southern Indian mode.165 Its verti-
cal format implies that the painting was displayed 
by the dikpālas (Kubera is depicted in the right top corner 
in Fig. 3.12 and in the left top corner in Fig. 3.13; Yama and 
Varuṇa are in the bottom corners), the East is guarded by 
the heavenly king of the East, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, who is clearly 
recognized by his attribute, a lute.
165. Another example of such is in Khokhlov 2019: fig. 26.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   95 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 100] ---
Yury Khokhlov96
on a banner and was possibly produced as part 
of a set representing a group of the eight great 
bodhisattvas (the images of this type are listed 
in Appendix 3.1  under numbers 10 –13). Such 
banners were probably used during Esoteric ritu-
als.166 For example, they could have been hung to 
form a circle as it is prescribed for images of the 
eight great bodhisattvas in the already mentioned 
Amoghavajra’s ritual manual for recitation of the 
Uṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇīsūtra (T 972).167 Parallels to 
these images of standing bodhisattvas can be found 
at Ellora as well. As mentioned, caves 11  and 12  
contain several groups of the eight great bodhisat-
tvas depicted standing.168
An outstanding painting in Fig. 3.20 , however, 
could be a direct copy from a Pallava or Sri Lankan 
original as it literally radiates the Pallava aesthet -
ics and, in contrast with the image in Fig. 3.19 , 
shows almost no Chinese constitute. The bodhi -
sattva sports a tubular and extremely tall hairstyle 
(jaṭāmukuṭa), a typical feature of Pallava imagery 
and Sri Lankan imagery in the Pallava style. A 
figure attributed as Tārā from the British Museum 
in Fig. 3.21  is one striking example of this fashion. 
The sculpture was discovered in Sri Lanka, but it 
might have been exported to Sri Lanka from the 
Pallava domain.169 The bodhisattva and Tārā are 
clad in lower garments of a similar design and 
their headdresses are secured by nearly identical 
and leaf-like crown elements. Unlike the other 
discussed images, the crown and armbands of the 
bodhisattva do not have spiked elements. It has to 
be noted that various decorations without spikes 
were also common in Pallava art.
2.6 examples of mixed imagery
As discussed in Part 2.1 , the bodhisattvas in Yulin 
Cave 25 (Fig. 3.1 ) were likely painted in accordance 
with standardized models known in Chinese art 
as yang. Several portable paintings discovered in 
Mogao Cave 17  suggest that yang models of bo-
166. On the use of banners during Buddhist rituals, see 
Wang 2
018: 46.
167. See fn. 92 a
nd Wang 2018: 47.
168. Malan
dra 1993: figs. 222, 223, 251, 252.
169. Srini
vasan 1999: 110.
Fig. 3.19: Bodhisattva Samantabhadra, ink and colour 
on silk, from Mogao Cave 17, 9th or 10th century, 59.8 
× 17.8 cm, the Guimet Museum, MG17770. (Photo 
© MNAAG, Paris, Dist. RMN-Grand Palais/image 
musée Guimet)
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   96 3/2/22   6:19 PM

--- [Page 101] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 97
Fig. 3.20: Bodhisattva, ink and colour on silk, 8th century, from Mogao Cave 17, 57.5 × 38.1 cm, the 
British Museum, 1919,0101,0.7 (with the permission of the British Museum).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   97 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 102] ---
Yury Khokhlov98
dhisattvas in the Southern Indian mode were pos-
sibly also used for depicting attending bodhisattvas 
in heavenly assemblies where the rest of the figures 
are in the Chinese mode. 
Perhaps the earliest example of such imagery is a 
portable painting shown in Fig. 3.22 , which belongs 
to the Tibetan period and is dated to 836 . The paint-
ing contains Chinese and Tibetan inscriptions and 
displays a mixture of the Chinese and Indian artis-
tic modes. It has been suggested that the Indianized 
images in the painting represent the Tibetan style and their appearance along with Chinese images is 
a sign of Tibetan influence, which allegedly mate-
rialized in Dunhuang art during the period of the 
Tibetan occupation.170 I would argue that neither 
in terms of iconography nor in terms of artistic 
mode can this painting be ascribed to Tibetan influ -
ence. Although the painting is titled by the British 
museum as ‘Paradise of Bhaiṣajyaguru’ , it was likely 
centred on Cintāmaṇicakra, Thousand-armed 
Avalokiteśvara, and Amoghapāśa, which was a 
popular grouping in Dunhuang. Their images are 
largely lost, but the deities are mentioned in the 
accompanying Chinese inscription. Cults of these 
Esoteric forms of Avalokiteśvara gained popular -
ity during the reign of Empress Wu (Ch. 武則天 ,  
r. 684–705 ) and were promoted by the court along 
with the Huayan doctrine.171 As a result, images of 
these deities are often found along with those be-
longing to the Huayan tradition.172 In this painting 
too, characteristic figures of two main bodhisattvas 
of Huayan Buddhism, Samantabhadra riding an 
elephant and Mañjuśrī riding a lion, are depicted 
right above the Esoteric versions of Avalokiteśvara. 
Finally, an assembly of Buddha Bhaiṣajyaguru oc-
cupies the top of the painting. All these subjects 
were popular in Dunhuang before the Tibetan 
period and altogether they can be found at already 
discussed Mogao Cave 148 , which was excavated 
between 766 and 776  (i.e. in the decade before the 
Tibetan conquest).173 As with Mogao Cave 148  and 
Yulin Cave 25 , the painting shows the coexistence 
of the two artistic modes. The bodhisattvas flanking 
the figure of Bhaiṣajyaguru are shown in the Indian 
mode, while the rest of the figures are depicted in 
the Chinese mode. These bodhisattvas represent 
the same type as that in the VAEGB composition 
170. Karmay 1975: 8–14; Wang 2018: 98–107.
171. On cults of Esoteric deities during the Tang, see 
Wong 2018: 184–200.
172. On Esot
eric imagery in Huayan context, see Wong 
2012: 223–260.
173. The iconographic programme of Mogao Cave 148 
includes sculptural representations of Cintāmaṇicakra 
and Amoghapāśa (no longer extant) and a painted image 
of Thousand-armed Avalokiteśvara along with distinctive 
Huayan images of Samantabhadra riding an elephant and 
Mañjuśrī riding a lion as well as several heavenly assemblies 
including that of Buddha Bhaiṣajyaguru. See Lee 2010: 91.
Fig. 3.21: Tārā?, copper alloy, 8th century, 
Sri Lanka, H 143 cm, the British Museum, 
1830,0612.4 (with the permission of the British 
Museum).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   98 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 103] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 99
Fig. 3.22: Paradise of Bhaiṣajyaguru, ink and colour on silk, from Mogao Cave 17, dated 836, Tibetan period, 152.3 
× 177.8 cm, the British Museum, 1919,0101,0.32 (with the permission of the British Museum). Right: close-up of 
the bodhisattva.
of Yulin Cave 25  (Fig. 3.1) and display the char -
acteristics of Southern Indian art such as spiked 
decorations and swagged necklaces (see a close-up 
of the bodhisattva in Fig. 3.22 ). A large rectangular 
cartouche in the centre of the painting contains 
Chinese and Tibetan inscriptions. The Chinese 
inscription is almost completely faded and illegi -
ble to the naked eye, while the Tibetan inscription 
is relatively clear.174 The Chinese inscription was 
read with the help of infrared photography and it 
includes the date. Although the inscriptions are 
similar in their content, it is clear that they are 
not translations of each other. The Tibetan one 
mentions an image of Pariṇatacakra instead of 
Amoghapāśa in the Chinese inscription, and fur -
thermore dedicates the painting to all living beings, 
whereas the Chinese inscription dedicates it to the 
donor’s deceased parents. Bearing in mind that the 
Chinese inscription is faded, and the majority of 
the painting is lost, it could be that the painting was 
restored at some point and then rededicated with 
the Tibetan inscription. It is also worth remem-
174. For the photograph of the inscriptions, see Wang 
2018: 102, fig. 44. bering that during the Tibetan period the Tibetan 
language was the language of the ruler and was 
used in Hexi in parallel with the Chinese and not 
only by Tibetan people.175 In this regard, a Tibetan 
inscription per se cannot be regarded as evidence 
of the Tibetan religious and/or artistic influence.
Another example of such synthesis is a 10 th 
century painting from the Musée Guimet (Fig. 3.23 ) 
that depicts the ten stages of bodhisattvahood ac-
cording to the Daśabhūmikasūtra, which is itself a 
part of the Avataṃsakasūtra. The bodhisattvas in 
the Southern Indian mode are included in one of 
the assemblies whereas the other figures are depict -
ed in the Chinese mode.176
The examples discussed in this section likely 
reflect the popularity of Indian icons in China as 
well as the creativity of Dunhuang artists.177
175. See fn. 47.
176. The iconography of the painting is discussed in Wong 
2007b: 343. According to Wong, the painting is the only 
known illustration of this subject.
177. In addition, in a British Museum painting from 
Mogao Cave 17 (Ch.XXVI. a. 007), which represents the 
Huayan Mañjuśrī riding a lion, the bodhisattva is depicted 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   99 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 104] ---
Yury Khokhlov100
conclusion for part 2
The images from Mogao and Yulin discussed above 
share a great deal of iconographic and stylistic sim -
ilarities with Pallava and Pallava-influenced ex-
amples from Southern India. Most of them can be 
related to the Yoga and other teachings propagated 
in China by Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra. Their 
stylistic consistency, which is already evident in the 
earliest examples (late 8th century), suggests that 
this artistic tradition emerged earlier and thus it 
must have been based on the sketch books brought 
to China by Vajrabodhi, who was active in the Tang 
capitals from 720  to 740 , and who was a prominent 
painter himself. His own works must have pro -
in the Southern Indian mode. Another example from the 
British Museum collection, where attending bodhisattvas 
are shown in the Southern Indian mode, is a painting 
Ch.ivi.0034. 
Fig 3.23: Ten stages of the bodhisattvahood according to the Avataṃsakasūtra, ink and colour on silk, from 
Mogao Cave 17, early 10th century, 286 × 189 cm, the Guimet museum, MG26465. (Photo © RMN-Grand Palais, 
MNAAG, Paris/Richard Lambert). Right: close-up of one of the assemblies.
moted the Pallava aesthetics as well. However, the 
popularity of such imagery in Dunhuang art in the 
second half of the 8th century is in all likelihood 
related to Amoghavajra’s activities in the Hexi Cor-
ridor. Since the dates of the discussed imagery span 
from the 8th to the 11 th century, it can be surmised 
that Amoghavajra’s teachings were adopted by 
the Tibetans in Hexi and remained popular in the 
region even after the collapse of both the Tibetan 
and Tang empires. Nevertheless, they were likely 
suppressed by a new wave of Esoteric transmission, 
which started arriving in Hexi from northeastern 
India in the late 10 th century.178 These new teach-
178. In the late 10th century, a large number of Chinese 
monk
s were sent to northeastern India through the Hexi 
Corridor in search of new Esoteric teachings. At the same 
time, many Indian monks arrived in China attracted by 
the lavish Buddhist patronage of the early Song emper-  
ors. It can be assumed that travelling through the Hexi 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   100 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 105] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 101
ings brought along new aesthetics characterized 
by the Pāla style. 
part 3.  a brief overview of the 
sout
hern indian influence on 
buddhist art in china
This part aims to demonstrate that the existence 
of a Southern Indian mode in Hexi art should not 
be perceived as disturbing or exceptional. There 
are other examples in Tang Buddhist art that com-
plement the Hexi material and reflect the centu -
ries-long interactions between the polities of South-
ern India, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia, and China.
Historical records from the 3 rd century CE 
onwards tell us about a great number of Bud -
dhist monks travelling between India and China 
by sea.179 Sri Lanka, whose Buddhist culture was 
intimately linked to that of Southern India, was 
an important transit stop for many of them. Early 
examples of these travelling monks include Faxian 
(Ch. 法顯 , 337/342–422 ), who spent two years in Sri 
Lanka on his way from Northern India to China; 
and Bodhidharma (Ch. 菩提達摩 ), the founder of 
Chinese Chan Buddhism, who travelled from the 
Pallava Kingdom to China in the late 5 th or early 
6th century.
Indianized polities of Southeast Asia played an 
important intermediate role in Buddhist and ar -
tistic transmission from Southern India to China. 
The Indianization of the region started in the early 
historical period and was facilitated by Tamil sea-
faring merchants. The process included adoption 
of Southern Indian religious cults, models of state-
hood, languages, scripts, and artistic styles. Early 
Buddhist and Brahmanic icons found in South -
east Asia display a dominating Southern Indian 
Corridor, these monks shared teachings and imagery 
with local Buddhist communities. On these movements, 
see van Schaik and Galambos 2012: 35–61; Sen 2016: 102, 
110–125. The earliest examples of Pāla style imagery in Hexi 
are found in the early 11th-century Mogao Cave 76, see 
Toyka-Fuong 1998. On Pāla-style imagery in Hexi art, see 
Khokhlov 2018.
179. On Buddh
ist monks travelling between China and 
India by sea, see Acri 2018.influence.180 According to Chinese sources, the 
Southeast Asian polities of Funan (Mekong delta, 
territory of Cambodia), Lynyi (territory of Central 
Vietnam) and Panpan (Malay peninsula, territory 
of Thailand) often sent Buddhist monks, texts, and 
images to the dynasties of Southern China.181
Although Buddhist art of the Southern Chinese 
dynasties before the Tang is almost completely lost, 
in his pioneering research on textual sources Al -
exander Soper  argued that in the late 5th and 6th 
centuries it was greatly influenced by the Southern 
Indian artistic tradition transmitted by maritime 
routes as well as through Indianized polities of 
Southeast Asia.182 Soper states that artists from 
Southern China were famed as great specialists in 
rendering ‘Indian Buddhist icons’ and their legacy 
can be traced in Buddhist art from the Northern 
Qi (550 –557 ) to the Northern Song dynasties (960 –
1127 ).183 Soper supported his argument by pointing 
to Southern Indian features found in some North-
ern Qi examples.184 His theory can be further con-
firmed thanks to sculptures recently excavated in 
the eastern coastal area of Shandong province.185 
As was discussed in Part 1 , interactions between 
Southern India and China increased dramatically 
during the Tang dynasty. However, the resulting 
artistic current in Tang art has rarely been high -
lighted in art historical literature. The problem 
partially lies in the lack of surviving material from 
Chang’an and Luoyang where foreign influences 
on art were especially strong. The capitals were 
prime destinations and places of residence for the 
majority of foreign monks and this was also true 
for Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra. These metropo-
lises suffered badly from the calamities of Chinese 
history and none of their hundreds of Buddhist 
temples have survived.186 Nevertheless, in addition 
to the discussed Dunhuang images, the Southern 
Indian facet of Tang Buddhist art can be further 
illustrated by a few more examples.
180. Guy 2014: 3–21.
181. Wade 20
14: 25–31.
182. Soper
 1960.
183. Ibid. : 8
8–89.
184. Ibid. : 95
–96, fig. 20.
185. For a discussion on this group of sculptures, see 
Okada 2004. See also Khokhlov 2019: 98–99, figs. 31–32.
186. Wong an
d Field 2008: 132–135.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   101 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 106] ---
Yury Khokhlov102
3.1 longmen buddha sculptures
About a hundred of sculptures depicting the 
Buddha seated in bhadrāsana are distributed in 
several caves at Longmen (Ch. 龍門 ) and Gongxian 
(Ch. 鞏縣 ) (Fig. 3.24 ). Each one of them is about 
one metre high and is dated by inscriptions to the 
period between 655  and 680. These inscriptions 
name the sculptures as ‘Buddha of the King of 
Udayana’ .187 Amy McNair argues for a Northern 
Indian stylistic origin of these images and com-
pares them with a Buddha figure from Sarnath. 
This attribution, however, ignores clear features of 
Southern Indian art present in the sculptures such 
as low uṣ ṇīṣa, bare right shoulder, and ankle-sweep -
ing robe, a vestige of the Amaravati tradition. The 
closest comparisons are metal sculptures excavat-
ed in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, which are 
datable to circa the 6 th century (Fig. 3.25 ).188 Several 
sculptures with similar stylistic characteristics are 
also known from Southeast Asian polities, thus 
suggesting the possibility of transmission through 
Southeast Asia as well.189
187. On these sculptures, see McNair 2007: 102–103.
188. In addition to the image in Fig. 3.25, see Buddha figures 
from the Buddhapad hoard, now in the British Museum 
collection (1905.1218.2; 1905.1218.3): https://www.britishmu -
seum.org/collection/object/A_1905-1218-2, https://www.
britishmuseum.org/collection/object/A_1905-1218-3 .
189. See Guy 2
014: cat. 20–23, 50, 51.3.2 two metal sculptures
The Metropolitan Museum of Art has a metal figure 
of a bodhisattva (Fig. 3.27 ), which was reportedly 
found in Vietnam and dated by the museum to 
the 7th century. Another similar figure, which was 
attributed to the Sui Dynasty (581–618 ) of China, 
has recently been published (Fig. 3.26 ).190
These figures show a synthesis of Chinese and 
Southern Indian aesthetics, similar to what is found 
190. von de Schulenburg et al. 2015: 150–151.
Fig. 3.24: ‘King Udayana Buddha’ images, stone, 
ca. 655–680, Tang dynasty, H ca. 100 cm, Longmen, 
Henan province, China (photograph by and with the 
permission of N. Revire).
Fig. 3.25: Buddha, copper alloy, 5th–6th century, from 
Nāgapaṭṭinam, Tamil Nadu, India, H 40.6 cm, the 
Metropolitan Museum, 1998.414 (Public Domain).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   102 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 107] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 103
Fig. 3.26: Bodhisattva, copper 
alloy, 8th century, Tang dynasty, 
China, 43 cm, private collection 
(courtesy of the owner and Dr 
Stephan von der Schulenburg).Fig. 3.27: Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, 
copper alloy, 8th century, Tang 
dynasty, China, 36.5 cm, the 
Metropolitan Museum, accession no. 
1993.387.14 (Public Domain).Fig. 3.28: Bodhisattva Maitreya, 
copper alloy, 8th or 9th century, 
Pallava period, 39.5 cm, from 
Tanjor, Tamil Nadu, formerly in the 
Government Museum of Chennai, 
stolen, present whereabouts 
unknown (with the permission of 
Serindia Publications, courtesy of Shane Suvikapakornkul).
in the painting from Mogao Cave 17 in Fig. 3.19 . 
Both display distinctive swagged necklaces, while 
the crown of the bodhisattva in Fig. 3.26  is deco-
rated with spikes. The date of their production is 
unlikely to be earlier than the 8th century, as the 
figures show closer connections with late Pallava 
material, such as the sculpture in Fig. 3.28 . The  
fact that the territory of Northern Vietnam (Đại 
Việt, Red River delta) belonged to Tang China 
suggests a probable southern Chinese origin for 
these sculptures. The occurrence of such imagery 
in southern China is not surprising, as Guangzhou 
was a major entry point to China for seafaring mer -
chants and monks arriving from South Asia. As 
was previously mentioned, three Tamil temples 
existed in Guangzhou in the 8th century that clearly 
demonstrates significant religious transmission.191 
Moreover, Amoghavajra himself was popular in the 
area as well. The master preached in Guangzhou 
right before his trip to South Asia. He attracted a 
great number of local followers, converted thou -
191. See fn. 24.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   103 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 108] ---
Yury Khokhlov104
sands of people to Buddhism, and conferred Eso-
teric initiations on members of the ruling elite.192 In 
addition, upon his return to China, Amoghavajra 
was temporarily banished from the court and spent 
four years (749–753 ) in the Guangzhou area.193 
It is worth noting that the sculptures under 
discussion are visually close to a famous icon of 
the Nanzhao and Dali kingdoms in Yunnan, the 
Acuoye Guanyin, which can also ultimately be 
aligned with a Pallava model.194 Taken together, 
these examples confirm considerable Southern 
Indian influence in the region.
3.3 nara embroidery and hōryūji 
murals
The embroidery in Fig. 3.29  belongs to the Nara 
National Museum in Japan. It has traditionally 
been dated to the early 8th century and is believed 
to have been produced in China, likely in one of 
the Tang capitals.195 The work depicts a heavenly 
assembly with the Buddha attended by a retinue 
of bodhisattvas, monks, and lay people. I regard 
images of the Buddha with two leading bodhisat-
tvas as heavily influenced by Southern Indian and 
Sri Lankan prototypes.
The Buddha exhibits the same iconography 
as that of the Longmen sculptures (Fig. 3.24 ). At 
the same time, his bulky proportions and a robe 
drape in the Amarāvatī style are strikingly similar 
to that in a circa 7 th century Pallava sculpture in 
Fig. 3.30.196 The folds of the robes in both figures 
are arranged in a similar and distinctive fashion. 
They are concentrated along the upper edge of the 
robe and below the waist, creating a flat area on 
the stomach.
The two chief bodhisattvas with their wide 
shoulders and almost naked torsos stand out vis-
ually from the group (see a close-up in Fig. 3.31 ). 
They represent a particular type of bodhisattva, 
which was popular in Pallava and Sri Lankan art 
192. Yang 2018: 33; Chou 1945: 288–289.
193. Yang 20
18: 41.
194. On Southeast Asian stylistic connections of this icon, 
see Guy 1995: 86.
195. Wong 2
018: 153–154.
196. On thi
s sculpture, see Rao 1915; Aiyappan and Sri-
nivasan 2000: 70–72.(see sculptures in Fig. 3.31 ).197 Bodhisattvas of this 
type are characterized by an upright posture, and by 
the abhaya- or vitarka-mudrā performed by right 
hand and kaṭaka-mudrā performed by left hand. 
The mudrā s are held distinctively at elbow-level. 
These figures can be bejewelled or unadorned, but 
always wear a distinctive flat and wide sash, which 
probably represents the skin of a black deer (Skt. 
kṛṣṇājina) worn in the manner of the sacred thread 
(Skt. yajñopavīta).198 It is loosely wrapped across 
the torso, forming a loop on the left shoulder and 
drapes down to the right hip. The bodhisattvas 
in the embroidery follow this model closely. As 
has been recently shown by Osmund Bopear -
achchi, this model likely represents Bodhisattva 
Avalokiteśvara as a protector of mariners.199 Such 
images were often found along river and sea trade 
routes that points to a maritime way of transmis-
sion of this iconographic form to China.
It has long been noted that these two bodhisat-
tvas in the embroidery resemble the bodhisattvas 
in the murals that are used to adorn the main hall 
of Hōryūji Temple in Japan (Fig. 3.32 ).200 These 
murals depicted heavenly assemblies of four 
buddhas as well as eight bodhisattvas, whose iden-
tities are not entirely certain. It is believed that the 
murals date to the early 8th century and represent 
the metropolitan Tang style that has largely been 
lost in China. Moreover, the figures in the murals 
were most likely executed with the help of full-sized 
stencils, which are believed to have been brought 
to Japan from one of the Tang capitals.201 
Fig. 3.33 compares the bodhisattva images from 
Yulin Cave 25 , the embroidery, and the Hōryūji 
murals. Other than certain variations in decora -
tions, the figures look strikingly similar in their 
197. A number of metal sculptures representing bo -
dhisattvas of this type were recovered in Indonesia and 
Thailand and it is assumed that they were imported from 
the Pallava Kingdom or Sri Lanka. See Guy 2014: cat. 6; a 
Pallava example is in cat. 7.
198. It was attributed as such by Dohanian. See Dohanian 
1977: 41.
199. Bopea
rachchi 2014: 161–187.
200.  On the Hōr
yūji and its murals, see Wong and Field 
2008. The most recent research on the dating of the Hōryūji 
murals can be found in Wong 2008.
201. Wong an
d Field 2008: 147–152.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   104 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 109] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 105
Fig. 3.29: Shaka-nyorai (Śākya-muni) preaching at Ryōju-sen (Gṛdhra-kūṭa) mountain, silk embroidery, probably 
Chinese work, 8th century, Tang Dynasty, China, 207 × 157 cm, Nara National Museum, 647-0, Japan (the 
photograph is provided by Nara National Museum).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   105 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 110] ---
Yury Khokhlov106
Fig. 3.30: Buddha, stone, 7th century, Pallava period, 240 cm, 
excavated on the territory of Kamakshidevi Temple, Kancipuram, 
Tamil Nadu, Government Museum Chennai (photograph by and 
courtesy of Yuko Fukuroi). Right: Buddha, detail of Fig. 3.29.
Fig. 3.31: (left) Bodhisattva, copper alloy, 8th–9th century, H 17.9 cm, Sri Lanka, Los 
Angeles County Museum of Art (Public Domain). Centre: Bodhisattva, detail of 
Fig. 3.29. Right: Bodhisattva, copper alloy, 8th century, Sri Lanka, Colombo National 
Museum (photograph by and with the permission of Osmund Bopearachchi).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   106 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 111] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 107
Fig. 3.32: Buddha Amida Pure Land, wall painting, panel 6, west wall, Kondō, 
Hōryūji, 8th century, Ikaruga, Nara Prefecture, Japan, not extant anymore 
(courtesy of Dorothy Wong).
Fig. 3.33: (left) Bodhisattva, detail of Fig. 3.32. Centre: Bodhisattva, detail of Fig. 3.1. Right: Bodhisattva, detail of 
Fig. 3.29. 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   107 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 112] ---
Yury Khokhlov108
linear structures, proportions, postures, gestures, 
and facial features. What unite them most is their 
elongated and almost naked torsos, remarkably 
broad shoulders, and contrasting narrow waists. 
Though located thousands of miles apart, the 
Hōryūji and Yulin bodhisattvas, with their almost 
identical swagged necklaces of the Southern Indian 
type, and similarly drawn sash and kṛṣ ṇājina, look 
as if they are from the same painting. Such si-
militude suggests that the images were based on 
standardized models. As mentioned, many of these 
yang, standardized models and templates for the 
replication of images, were recorded in official in-
ventories of objects transferred from Tang China 
to Japan.202 The Hōryūji example also shows that 
artistic models were transmitted from China to 
Japan even with the help of full-sized stencils. As 
was also already mentioned, significant artistic in-
terexchange existed between Dunhuang and the 
Tang capitals as well.203 
In my view, taken as a group, the imagery 
from Yulin Cave 25 , the Nara embroidery, and 
the Hōryūji murals confirm the existence of a 
distinctive tradition in Tang Buddhist art, which 
was most likely associated with Vajrabodhi as a 
painter.204 It should be mentioned that the South-
202. See fn. 63.
203. See fn. 6
7.
204. Remarkable similarities between the images of bo -
dhisattvas from Yulin Cave 25, the Nara embroidery, and the 
Hōryūji murals would also seem to suggest that they were 
created in a relatively close temporal proximity. Out of the 
three bodhisattvas in Fig. 3.33, only the Yulin image is secure -
ly datable. It was created between 776 and 851, but most likely 
in the late 8th century. In contrast, the Hōryūji murals and 
the Nara embroidery have been variously dated by scholars 
on stylistic grounds from the late 7th to the late 8th century 
(Wong 2008: 143). In her recent research, Wong compares 
the Hōryūji figures with bodhisattvas from Dunhuang caves 
of the early Tang dynasty (Wong 2008: 158–168). Although 
some of her comparative examples (especially from Cave 
329) are, indeed, very close in clothing and decorations, their 
body proportions are strikingly different. The Dunhuang 
figures are slim and elongated, which is in sharp contrast to 
mighty torsos and wide shoulders of the Hōryūji and Nara 
bodhisattvas. In my view, such fullness of figures points to 
a later date. In fact, the painting from Yulin Cave 25 (Fig. 
3.1) is the closest comparison from Dunhuang. In the light 
of the presented analysis, the dating of the Hōryūji murals 
and the Nara embroidery should perhaps be reconsidered.ern Indian influence on the Hōryūji murals has 
previously been suggested by at least two other 
scholars. Jeannine Auboyer noted similarities in 
clothing between the Hōryūji figures and Ellora 
statues, while Marilyn Rhie argued that the facial 
features of the bodhisattvas reflect the influence 
of Southern Indian art, an influence she saw as re-
sulting from the maritime exchange of Tang China 
with Southern India.205
part 4.  from the hexi corridor to 
centr
al tibet
Tibetan rule in the Hexi Corridor lasted roughly 
from the mid-8th till the mid-9 th century and coin-
cided with a period of the most intense promotion 
of Buddhism in the Tibetan Empire. As discussed, 
the region was one of the major centres for the 
teaching and practice associated with the Southern 
Indian Yoga tradition, which became dominant 
in the official Buddhist ceremony and doctrine of 
both China and Tibet in the latter half of the 8th 
century.
The Tibetan religious historiography ascribes 
the introduction of the Yoga teachings in Tibet to 
Northern Indian master Buddhaguhya, who was 
supposedly active in the 8th century. However, his 
identity and life story cannot be historically verified, 
and some scholars cast doubt on his influence in 
Tibet.206 On the other hand, the Testament of Ba 
(Tib. Dba’ bzhed/Sba bzhed), a historical account 
on the origin of Buddhism in Tibet, which was 
probably compiled in the 11 th or 12 th centuries, 
attests to significant activities of Chinese monks 
from Hexi in Central Tibet in the second half of the 
8th century. It says, for example, that the Buddhist 
master Moheyan from Dunhuang was patronized 
by the Tibetan court and even had a majority of fol -
lowers in Tibet in the late 8th century.207 According 
to the Testament of Ba, tensions developed between 
the Chinese and newly arrived Indian teachers, who 
allegedly taught a different path towards enlighten -
ment. The Testament of Ba further states that these 
tensions were resolved in a formal debate, where 
205. Auboyer 1941: 71; Rhie 1988: 27–28.
206.  Weinb
erger 2003: 30, 83–90; Nagasawa 2017. 
207. Wangdu and Diemberger 2000: 76, n. 287; van Schaik 
2015: 14–17.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   108 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 113] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 109
the Chinese side was defeated and expelled from 
Tibet. As discussed by van Schaik, this episode has 
no documentary value and was likely designed to 
validate new Indian lineages, which started arriving 
in Tibet in the 11 th century, as the only genuine 
source of Buddhism.208 It has been traditionally 
understood that the Chinese party represented the 
Chan tradition, which emphasizes a concept-free 
meditation as opposed to scholastic Indian tradi-
tion advocating a gradual path and a multitude 
of methods including Esoteric teachings. In the 
light of recent scholarship, however, this picture 
looks not only simplified, but also anachronistic. 
As argued by Sharf, the very notion that Chan and 
Esoteric teachings constituted independent tradi -
tions in China in the 8th century can be mislead-
ing. Moreover, these teachings had a few areas of 
congruence and were likely practised in the same 
Buddhist circles.209 With regard to Hexi, van Schaik 
has demonstrated that in the 8th and 9 th centu -
ries monks in Dunhuang, who were identified as 
members of Chan lineages in the later texts, prac-
tised various Esoteric rituals, including those asso-
ciated with the Yoga tradition in general and the 
Vajradhātu ma ṇḍala in particular.210 Furthermore, 
several Chinese and Tibetan sources suggest that 
Moheyan himself was proficient in Esoteric rituals 
as well.211 These traits find striking parallels in the 
teachings of the Nyigmapa (Tib. rNying ma pa), the 
oldest school of Tibetan Buddhism, which traces 
its origin back to the Imperial period. According to 
Snellgrove, there was a considerable vogue of Yoga -
tantras in early Tibet and many Mahāyogatantras 
of the Nyigmapa, which were largely rejected by 
the later Tibetan schools ‘as unorthodox and prob-
ably Chinese’, conform to the content and style 
of ‘orthodox Yogatantras’, such as the STTS.212 In 
addition, the Nyigmapa tradition of Dzogchen (Tib. 
rDzogs chen, the Great Perfection), which includes 
elements of the Mahāyoga and Chan teachings, was 
viewed by some 13 th and 14 th century authorita-
tive Tibetan scholars as the Chinese doctrine of 
Moheyan.213 
208. van Schaik 2015: 15.
209. Sharf 2
017: 53.
210. van Sch
aik 2015: 168.
211. Ibid. : 13
2–133.
212. Snell
grove 1987: 457–460.
213. Karma
y 2007: 11, 140–142.Altogether this would seem to suggest that Bud -
dhist masters from Hexi, who have been perhaps 
misleadingly labelled as Chan monks in modern 
scholarship,214 were instrumental in the transmis-
sion of the Yoga tradition and likely many other 
‘not Chan’ teachings to the Tibetans in the 8th and 
9th centuries. 
This can be also supported by the discussed 
example of Ye shes dbyangs, the Tibetan monk, 
who has been identified as a member of the Chan 
lineage in the later Dunhuang texts, and who prop -
agated the cult of VAEGB as part of Amoghavajra’s 
practice of the Bhadracarī.
According to Weinberger and Dalton, it is 
nearly certain that the STTS, the root Tantra of 
the Yoga tradition, was transmitted to Tibet and 
probably even translated into Tibetan during the 
Imperial period, though no details of the transla-
tion are known and the text is missing from the 
Imperial catalogues.215 In contrast, the Chinese 
translations are much better documented and 
historically attested, and it is not impossible that 
the early Tibetan renditions could have been based 
on the Chinese texts. The earliest work in Chinese 
summarizing the principles of the STTS dates to 
723 and is authored by Vajrabodhi. It was followed 
by Amoghavajra’s translation of the first part of the 
STTS produced in Liangzhou around 755 .216
As a matter of fact, the Chinese legacy in 
Tibetan Buddhism was deliberately minimized 
by later Tibetan historiographies and by a prac-
tice of editing the colophons and texts of Tibetan 
translations from non-Sanskrit sources in order to 
connect them directly to the Indian tradition. This 
practice started in as early as the 9 th century.217 As 
James Gentry put it, 
the general unreliability of translation colo -
phons and centuries of scribal and editorial ac -
tivity, which often included efforts during the 
Imperial period and thereafter to standardize 
Tibetan scriptural translations according to 
an imperially-decreed common lexicon, have 
214. For example, see Kapstein 2000: 43.
215. Weinb
erger 2010: 146–150; Dalton 2017: 329–330.
216. Weinb
erger 2003: 9; Yang 2018: 41.
217. Issues concerning the Chinese legacy in Tibetan 
Buddhism were discussed in Li 2016: 95. Specifically on 
doubtful colophons in tantric material, see van der Kuijp 
1992; Almogi 2008. 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   109 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 114] ---
Yury Khokhlov110
obscured the process by which these collec -
tions and their translations came into being 
and were transmitted. As a result, the role of 
Chinese and other language translations of 
Indic texts in Tibetan translation activity and 
the formation of Tibetan scriptural language 
remains little understood’.218 
Regarding the Tibetan lineages of transmission, it 
is clear that for such important religious traditions 
like that of the Y oga, they were of great political 
consequence, and therefore there is no a priori 
reason to assume that they are much more reliable 
than the colophons. 
4.1 the main temple of samye
As was noted by Weinberger, one of the strongest 
pieces of evidence for the importance of the Y oga 
tradition in early Tibetan Buddhism is the first 
Tibetan monastery of Samye.219 The iconographic 
programme of its main temple, which was seriously 
damaged during the Cultural Revolution, can be re-
constructed from various historical sources includ -
ing the Testament of Ba and a Tibetan Chronicle 
The Mirror Illuminating the Royal Genealogies  (Tib. 
Rgyal rabs gsal ba’i me long).220 In the following, I 
will try to make sense of it with the help of Kimiaki 
Tanaka’s recent interpretation.221 
The main temple had three floors and a Chi -
nese-type roof.222 On the first floor, the central icon 
was Buddha Śākyamuni, which was surrounded by 
sculptures of the eight great bodhisattvas, and two 
additional bodhisattvas, Acala and Trailokyavi-
jaya. As Tanaka remarked, the combination of the 
Buddha/Vairocana with the eight great bodhisat -
tvas, Acala, and Trailokyavijaya corresponds to a 
maṇḍala introduced by Amoghavajra in a ritual 
manual for recitation of the Uṣ ṇīṣavijayādhāra ṇī 
(T 972).223 Amoghavajra was the most enthusiastic 
propagator of this dhāra ṇī; he elevated its status 
from being a scripture with salvific and protec -
tive properties for individuals, to a scripture of the  
218. Gentry 2019.
219. Weinb
erger 2010: 140.
220. Engli
sh translations of these sources can be found 
in Wangdu and Diemberger 2000 and Sørensen 1994.
221. Tanak
a 2018: 83–85.
222. Søren
sen 1994: 376–381.
223. See fn. 92
.national defence and protection.224 Bearing in mind 
the nationwide significance of Samye, the emphasis 
on apotropaic qualities of Buddhist teachings in its 
iconographic programme would have made perfect 
sense. It is not unlikely that the enormous power 
ascribed to the Uṣ ṇīṣavijayādhāra ṇī in Tang China 
led to the appropriation of the related rituals in 
Tibet. A textual fragment in the Tibetan language 
found in Dunhuang, which describes a ritual in -
volving Vairocana, the eight great bodhisattvas, 
Acala, and Trailokyavijaya, could be regarded as 
possible evidence for such appropriation.225
The second floor was centred on Vairocana of 
an unknown affiliation flanked by the eight great 
bodhisattvas and two additional bodhisattvas, the 
same as those on the first floor. Buddhas of the 
past, present and future; Medicine Buddha; and 
Buddha Amitābha were installed in front of the 
Vairocana and bodhisattvas. A pair of Chinese 
gatekeepers holding a vajra, known as King and 
Kang, was also included in the composition. It is 
tempting to suggest that Vairocana and the eight 
great bodhisattvas on this floor might have rep -
resented the practice of the Bhadracarī, which, as 
discussed above, was an extremely popular aspira-
tional prayer in Imperial Tibet and was believed to 
prolong the tsenpo’s life. In this regard, it is worth 
mentioning that other depictions related to the 
Avataṃsakasūtra subjects were present at Samye 
as well. While Sudhana’s spiritual journey from the 
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra was illustrated in a wall frieze in 
the great courtyard, the Daśabhūmikasūtra, which 
describes the ten stages of bodhisattvahood, was 
illustrated in murals of the main temple’s third 
floor.226 As mentioned, the only known illustra-
tion for the Daśabhūmikasūtra comes from Dun-
huang227 (Fig. 3.23) and a similar composition could 
224. Lin 2014: 139–140. For example, Emperor Daizong, 
under the threat from advancing Uighurs and Tibetans 
in 765, ordered Amoghavajra to install a group of monks 
at court to chant the dhāra ṇī for the sake of the nation. In 
776, Daizong ordered 
all nuns and monks of the country 
to chant the dhāra ṇī. See Yang 2018: 159.
225. The text title is Rnam par snang mdzad ’khor dang 
bcas pa la bstod pa. It is found in P.T. 7a and in IOL TIB J 
366/3. See Tanaka 2018: 81; Tanaka 2000; Heller 1997; Dalton 
and van Schaik 2006: 97–98.
226. van Schaik and Doney 2007: 187–188 ; Sørensen 1994: 
3bh79.
227. See fn. 1
76.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   110 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 115] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 111
have been depicted at Samye. A principal image 
of the third floor represented Vairocana with four 
heads (facing four directions) surrounded by eight 
unidentified bodhisattvas, two for each head, and 
many other deities. This group has traditionally 
been understood as representing the Sarvavid-Vai -
rocana ma ṇḍala of the Sarvadurgatipariśodha- 
natantra (hereafter SDP).228 However, as Kimiaki 
Tanaka has pointed out, Vairocana with four heads 
could just as well stand for the Vajradhātu-Vai -
rocana, the central deity of the STTS.229 Tanaka 
further notes that images of the four Buddhas of 
the Vajradhātu ma ṇḍala depicted back-to-back 
were installed at Samye during the modern recon-
struction.230 Moreover, Tibetan historical source 
Ide’u Chos ’byung explicitly states that all images 
at the third floor were erected as a depiction of the 
god-assembly of the Vajradhātu.231 The SDP was 
specifically associated with mortuary rites and thus 
the alleged installation of the Sarvavid-Vairocana 
maṇḍala as the central composition of the principal 
temple requires further explanation. In contrast, a 
version of the Vajradhātu ma ṇḍala fits perfectly 
with the official status of Samye. As discussed, this 
maṇḍala was the cornerstone of the Yoga tradition 
and a central element of state protection rituals in 
contemporaneous China.232 
228. Weinberger 2010: 140. The SDP is regarded as an ex-
planatory Tantra on part two of the STTS, see Tanaka 2018:
 
321. It is centred on Buddha’s Uṣṇīṣa deities and mirrors the 
narrative found in various versions of the Sūtra of the Revered 
and Victorious Dhāra ṇī of the Buddha’s Uṣ ṇīṣa ( Uṣṇīṣavi-
jayādhāra ṇī). Both the SDP and the Uṣṇīṣavijayādhāra ṇī 
were specifically employed for mortuary rituals, see Wang 
2018: 25, 42–50; Weinberger 2010: 146. The history of the 
early translation of the SDP into Tibetan is far from clear. 
The text is listed in the Imperial catalogue and the colophon, 
which dates to the 8th century, gives the names of Indian and 
Tibetan translators, see Weinberger 2010: 148–149. However, 
the colophon is proven to be unreliable, and the identity of 
the translators has been questioned: see van der Kuijp 1992.
229. Vajradhātu-Vairocana can be depicted with four 
heads as well, but in contrast with Sarvavid-Vairocana, 
who performs the dhyana-mudrā, Vajradhātu-Vairocana 
performs the bodhyaṅgī-mudrā. See Tanaka 2018: 83; on 
four-faced Vairocana in the STTS, see Weinberger 2003: 187.
230. Tanaka 2018: 84.
231. Sørensen 1994: 379, n. 1260.
232. There is strong evidence showing that the Vajradhātu 
maṇḍala was known in Tibet in the 8th century. See Wein-
berger 2010: 144.In addition, the main temple at Samye can be 
compared to the Golden Pavilion of Jin’ge mon-
astery (Ch. 金閣寺 ) constructed in 767  on Mount 
Wutai.233 The construction of the monastery was 
initiated by Amoghavajra who started promot -
ing the cult of Mount Wutai towards the end of 
his life. Built with lavish imperial sponsorship, it 
became one of the principal monasteries respon -
sible to carry out apotropaic rituals for the sake 
of the nation. Similarly with Samye, the Golden 
Pavilion, a main temple of the monastery, had a 
three-storey design with a vertically oriented icono -
graphic programme centred around Vairocana. As 
was suggested by Wei-Cheng Lin, the pavilion was 
likely conceived to represent a three-dimensional 
version of the Vajradhātu ma ṇḍala whose five-fold 
system correlated with the five monasteries and five 
peaks of Mount Wutai.234 The Tibetans must have 
been aware of these developments in China, as the 
popularity of Wutai Shan in the Tibetan Empire is 
well attested in historical sources and, according to 
the Old Dynastic History of the Tang, the Tibetan 
tsenpo once even requested a picture of Mount 
Wutai from the Tang court.235 Significantly, the 
first representations of Mount Wutai appeared in 
Dunhuag art during the Tibetan period.236 
The discussed parallels are striking and suggest 
that the decision to build Samye might have been 
motivated by the apotropaic qualities of certain 
Buddhist teachings. I have later come across a 
1983  article by Christopher Beckwith, where he 
put forward a theory suggesting that the Tibetan 
adoption of Buddhism as a state religion in general 
and the building of Samye in particular were in-
spired by the Chinese model of National Protection 
Buddhism maintained by Amoghavajra, and were, 
at least partially, dictated by a need to resolve the 
crisis of legitimacy faced by the Tibetan emperor 
Trisong Detsen.237 I was delighted to learn that I 
233. On the Golden Pavilion and Jin’ge monastery, see 
Lin 20
14: 131–154.
234. Lin 201
4: 149.
235. Debre
czeny 2011: 8–9; Wong 1993: 39.
236. Wong 19
93: 41.
237. Beckwith 1983. On the notion of National Protection 
Buddhism in Tang China, see Orzech 1998. In particular, 
on the term ‘National Protection Buddhism’, see Orzech 
1998: 3, n. 9.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   111 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 116] ---
Yury Khokhlov112
came to the same conclusion independently, but 
from a different angle. Regrettably, no original 
images survived from Samye which could provide 
art historical evidence for sources of their cor-
responding teachings. Nevertheless, I argue that 
Samye’s aesthetics can be reconstructed from the 
artwork created at the earliest stage of Buddhist 
revival in Tibet in the 11 th century.
11th century clay sculptures from 
central tibetan temples 
After the collapse of the empire in the mid-9th 
century, Tibet lost its colonies and went to a so-
called period of fragmentation. The monastic tra-
dition perished to be reintroduced only in the late 
10th century with a religious movement known in 
Tibetan history as the ‘later spread of the Dharma ’ 
(Tib. phyi dar ). Although most of Hexi was recap-
tured by the Tang forces, its capital and a former 
Amoghavajra’s seat, Liangzhou, remained under 
local Tibetan rule up to the 11 th century, when it 
was absorbed into the Xi Xia Empire.238 The region 
undoubtedly continued to hold a position of Bud-
dhist authority in Central Tibet, as in the late 10 th 
century a group of men from there were sent to the 
areas of Liangzhou and its neighbour, the Tibetan 
kingdom of Tsongkha, in order to bring the monas -
tic tradition back to Central Tibet.239 Being ordained 
in these areas, the new monks, sometimes labelled 
as the Eastern Vinaya monks, returned to Central 
Tibet and initiated the formation of Buddhist com-
munities, the reconstruction of old temples, and the 
building of new ones. Although Samye and other 
royal temples were not in use and in a poor state, 
they still contained sculptures and paintings.240 In 
addition, a network of small temples continued to 
function under the patronage of local rulers. Ac -
cording to Tibetan historical sources, hundreds of 
Buddhist establishments were renovated and built 
in Central Tibet during the 11 th century. Renova-
tion of old temples, symbols of Tibet’s glorious past, 
was a top priority during this period241 and it can 
238. van Schaik and Galambos 2012: 64–65.
239. Ibid. : 6
8–74.
240.  David
son 2005: 94–95.
241. On the ac
tivities of the eastern Vinaya monks and therefore be surmised that survived specimens of 
Imperial art were renovated and replicated in the 
new temples. For example, Samye monastery was not only renovated, but was also taken as a model 
for Grwa thang monastery (founded in 1081 ).242 
Thus it is the artistic styles of the late Imperial 
period that would have been prevalent in the 11 th 
century Buddhist art in Central Tibet. 
In this regard, I would like to draw attention to 
a group of clay sculptures from the Central Tibetan 
temples/monasteries of G.ye dmar, Rtis gnas gsar, 
Zhwa lu Gser khang, Rkyang bu, Grwa thang, Zho 
nang, and Snye thang.243 Although most of them 
were lost during the Cultural Revolution, their 
images can still be seen in pre-1950  photographs 
taken by Li Gotami Govinda and Giuseppe Tucci’s 
expedition.244 Luckily, the sculptures of Snye thang 
monastery have survived.245 
These temples were founded or renovated at 
the earliest stage of the Buddhist revival in the 11 th 
century. Despite the fact that some of these temples 
are located at a considerable distance from one 
another, their sculptures demonstrate remarkable 
stylistic consistency. This, I believe, confirms that 
the sculptures reflect Buddhist aesthetics of the 
Imperial period, which must have been a common 
source of inspiration for Central Tibetan artists at 
the time.246 With regard to the iconographic pro-
the general situation in Central Tibet at the time, see ibid. : 
84–115.
242. Vital
i 1990: 49; Heller 2002: 40–41; Stoddard 2018: 
96–97. 
243. These te
mples were discussed in Vitali 1990: 37–69; 
Lo Bue 2000; von Schroeder 2001: 836–851.
244.  Many ph
otographs are reproduced in publications 
listed in the previous footnote. Also see Govinda 1979: 
40–50.
245. For description and images of the sculptures, see 
von Schroeder 2001: 860–869. Although von Schroeder 
dates the sculptures to circa 1200, I believe they belong to 
the 11th century.
246. Along t
he same lines, Heather Stoddard suggested 
that surviving murals at Grwa thang reflect the aesthetics 
employed at Samye in the late 8th century. Stoddard 2018: 
96–97. However, in addition to the imagery in the early 
style, the murals also include some depictions in the Pāla 
style of northeastern India, which was introduced to Tibet 
in the 11th century. On the history and paintings of Grwa 
thang, see Heller 2002.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   112 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 117] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 113
grammes, much of the subject matter depicted in 
these temples had already been popular during the 
Imperial period. For example, four-faced Vairoca-
na with retinue and Vairocana grouped with eight 
bodhisattvas can be found in the iconographic pro -
grammes of both Samye and the temples under 
discussion. Most remarkably, the sculptures, which 
depict these groupings, show the same distinctive 
elements of the Southern Indian artistic mode as 
they are found in the imagery from Mogao and 
Yulin.
For example, Rkyang bu temple, which was es-
tablished shortly before 1037 ,247 contained a sculp-
tural representation of the Vajradhātu ma ṇḍala 
with four-faced Vairocana at its centre (Fig. 3.34 ).248 
As suggested above, Vairocana in this form had 
247. Vitali 1990: 56–59.
248. This figure has been often misidentified as Sar -
vavid-Vairocana in the earlier publications.likely been installed on the third floor of the main 
temple at Samye. Another four-faced Vairocana is 
recorded in a temple with a Chinese roof (Tib. rgya 
phibs) at Rtis gnas gsar, which was founded during 
the Imperial period and renovated in the 11 th cen-
tury.249 The Vajradhātu sculptures in Rkyang bu 
temple are decorated with spiked armbands and 
swagged necklaces, which are characteristics of the 
Southern Indian mode in Hexi art (Fig. 3.35 ). The 
sculptures’ style and splendor show striking par -
allels with the 8th and 9 th century Hexi imagery 
(see examples in Figs. 3.1 , 3.12, 3.13). Their square 
and tiered thrones are similar to those in the Hexi 
depictions as well. It is important to stress that 
these sculptures are more closely related to the 
earlier Hexi examples than to contemporaneous 
10th and 11 th century ones.250 The contempora -
249. Vitali 1990: 51; von Schroeder 2001: 840–841.
250. See Khok
hlov 2019: figs. 17, 20, 21.Fig. 3.34: Vairocana and Amoghasiddhi as parts of the sculptural Vajradhātu Ma ṇḍala, clay sculpture, 11th 
century, R
kyang bu temple, Central Tibet, not extant anymore (photograph by Fosco Maraini, 1937; courtesy of 
Ulrich von Schroeder).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   113 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 118] ---
Yury Khokhlov114
Fig. 3.36: One of the eight bodhisattvas surrounding 
the figure of Vairocanābhisambodhi, clay sculpture, 
11th century, G.ye dmar temple, Central Tibet 
(photograph by Li Gotami Govinda, 1979; courtesy of 
Ulrich von Schroeder).Fig. 3.35: Ratnasambhava and attending deities as parts 
of the sculptural Vajradhātu ma ṇḍala, c
lay sculptures, 
11th century, Rkyang bu temple, Central Tibet, not 
extant anymore (photograph by Fosco Maraini, 1937; 
courtesy of Ulrich von Schroeder).
neous imagery from the Hexi Corridor shows a 
considerable decline in artistic quality that does not 
match the refinement and monumentality of these 
Tibetan sculptures. This would seem to confirm 
that the sculptures represent the revival of the Im-
perial aesthetics, which in turn were influenced by 
the 8th and 9 th century art from the Hexi Corridor.
Groups of the eight bodhisattvas are recorded 
in all the temples (Figs. 3.37 and 3.38). In addition, 
at G.ye dmar there was a group of sixteen bo -
dhisattvas (Fig. 3.36), which probably represented 
sixteen bodhisattvas of the Bhadrakalpa, a promi-
nent group in the Yoga tradition and members of 
the Vajradhātu ma ṇḍala.251 In all these groups, the 
251. On the sixteen bodhisattvas of the Bhadrakalpa, see 
Tanaka 2018: 169–170.bodhisattvas accompany crowned figures display-
ing the dhyāna-mudrā, which have been identified 
either as Vairocanābhisambodhi or as Amitābha/
Amitāyus.252 These deities are differentiated only by 
the presence/absence of a bowl/vase in their hands. 
It is possible that initially all of them represented 
252. von Schroeder 2001: fig. XIII-8, 9, 11, 13, 34B.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   114 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 119] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 115
Fig. 3.37: Vairocanābhisambodhi (worshipped as Amitāyus) and one of the eight bodhisattvas, 
clay sculptures, 11th century, G.ye dmar temple, Central Tibet (photograph by Li Gotami 
Govinda, 1979; courtesy of Ulrich von Schroeder).
Vairocanābhisambodhi. The bowls/vases could 
have been added later when the cult of Vairocana 
declined in popularity.253 As discussed, examples of 
a group of bodhisattvas and Vairocana displaying 
the dhyana-mudrā are relatively rare and, apart 
from Tibet, they can be found in Southern India 
and in the Hexi Corridor. Regarding artistic fea -
tures, the Tibetan sculptures are executed either 
in the Tibetan mode (clad in Tibetan-style robes) 
253. The same conversion is evident in the early 9th-cen -
tury rock carving at ’Bis khog in Eastern Tibet, where 
Vairocana (identified by inscription) holds a bowl in his 
hands (see Fig. 3.10). Another example of Vairocana who 
was probably converted into Amitābha at some point can 
be seen in the main temple of Tabo. See Klimburg-Salter 
and Luczanits 1998: 101, 143–146, fig. 146.(Figs. 3.36 and 3.37), or the Indian mode (Fig. 3.38). 
These two modes of representation can already be 
found in the early 9 th century rock carvings in 
Eastern Tibet (Figs. 3.9 –3.11 ). Significantly, the 
sculptures in both the Tibetan and Indian modes 
are adorned with spiked armbands that is a clear 
indication of the influence from the Hexi Corri -
dor. In Figs. 3.36  and 3.37 , I have highlighted the 
armbands with blue arrows; in Fig. 3.38, some re-
maining spikes are clearly visible in the armbands 
of the bodhisattva. Despite substantial renovation, 
the figures of Vairocana and the bodhisattva in Fig. 
3.38 still convey the same splendid aesthetics as that 
we see in the late 8th century images from Yulin 
Cave 25 (in particular compare Vairocana in Fig. 
3.38 with Vairocana in Fig. 3.2 ). 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   115 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 120] ---
Yury Khokhlov116
As it was already stated, since no direct con -
tacts between the Tibetan Empire and Southern 
Indian polities are known to date, the source of the 
Southern Indian features in Tibetan art can only 
be Hexi/China. Also, it is very important to note 
that not all discussed sculptures display these ele-
ments. They are mostly found in sculptures which 
represent subjects of the Yoga tradition and Vairo-
canābhisambodhi with bodhisattvas.254 The same 
correlation is evident in Hexi art. As highlighted, 
imagery played a pivotal role in the transmission 
of Esoteric teachings, hence it can be deduced that 
these parallels between the Tibetan and Hexi de -
pictions reflect not only the artistic transmission, 
254. For depictions which do not display the element of 
the So
uthern Indian mode, see sculptures at G.ye dmar in 
von Schroeder 2001: fig. XIII-10; and murals at Grwa thang 
in Vitali 1990: plates 29–34.but also the transmission of the Y oga tradition, as 
well as the cult of V AEGB from the Hexi Corridor 
to Tibet. Although the Chinese textual anteced-
ents and visual evidence from Hexi provide solid 
grounds for this conclusion, much research needs 
to be done in the area of Tibetan textual scholar -
ship. Such research could potentially uncover ad-
ditional textual evidence as well as possible traces 
of Chinese lexical influence in the relevant Tibetan 
texts. From a larger perspective, these stylistic and 
iconographic traits from Hexi, which are detect-
ed in the early Tibetan imagery, provide a strong 
support of the Chinese background of the Tibetan 
adoption of Buddhism as a state religion. 
Finally, in parallel with the Southern Indian 
mode in Hexi art, the artistic mode represented 
by these Tibetan sculptures gradually vanished in 
Tibet after the 11 th century. Its disappearance likely 
reflects a decline of interest in the older teachings Fig. 3.38: Vairocanābhisambodhi (worshipped as Amitāyus) and one of the eight bodhisattvas, clay 
sculptures, 11th century, H 310 cm and 330 cm, Snye Thang monastery, Central Tibet (photograph by 
Alain Bordier, 1998; courtesy of Ulrich von Schroeder).
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   116 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 121] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 117
and their imagery caused by the arrival of new 
teachings and corresponding imagery in the Pāla 
style from northeastern India.255
conclusion
In tracing the artistic background and doctrinal 
affiliations of a group of images from Mogao and 
Yulin, this research elucidates the intricate web of 
politics, religion and art that connected the Pallava 
Kingdom of Southern India, Tang China and Im-
perial Tibet. Addressing a period of particularly 
intense Buddhist interexchange between South 
and East Asia, this article contributes to reshaping 
our understanding of several key issues. Firstly, it 
highlights considerable Southern Indian traits in 
Buddhist art of Tang China and identifies a dis -
tinctive artistic tradition, which was most likely 
established in China by Vajrabodhi, a renowned 
Buddhist master as well as a painter from the 
Pallava Kingdom of Southern India. Specific sty -
listic and iconographic features found in the Dun-
huang imagery can be confidently traced to the 
art of the Pallava kingdom in Tamil Nadu and to 
the Pallava influenced art in the Western Deccan. 
The subjects of these representations belong to 
the Y oga tradition and the cult of the eight great 
bodhisattvas, which were propagated in China by 
Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra.
On the other hand, this chapter helps in recon-
structing artistic features of Buddhist art of Tamil 
Nadu that was largely lost in India. In addition, the 
Pallava influenced mode of the discussed Chinese 
and Tibetan images constitutes material evidence 
for the popularity of the Y oga tradition and the 
cult of the eight great bodhisattvas in Tamil Nadu 
in the 8th century.
Last, but not least, this research defies the idea 
of ‘early Tibetan Buddhist art’ as represented by the 
artwork created in the Hexi Corridor during and 
after the period of Tibetan rule. Moreover, it shows 
quite the opposite and suggests that the conquest 
of the Hexi Corridor enabled the Tibetan appro -
255. In a forthcoming article, I argue that in this process 
the Hexi Corridor played a crucial role as well, and these 
northeastern Indian teachings and Pāla aesthetics were 
initially introduced to Tibet through Hexi. See fn. 178 and 
Khokhlov 2018. priation of Chinese religious and artistic trends, 
which were popular in the region in the 8th century. 
Furthermore, the artistic and iconographical con-
siderations presented in this research support the 
theory that the Tibetan adoption of Buddhism as a 
state religion was most likely based on the Chinese 
model of National Protection Buddhism estab -
lished by Amoghavajra.
appendix 3.1
A list of paintings from Mogao and Yulin that 
display the Southern Indian artistic mode dis -
cussed in this chapter
This list is not exhaustive and contains only the 
most important published examples.
1) A wall painting of Kubera with two attendants, 
Yulin Cave 15 , Tibetan period, Fig. 3.17 .
2) A wall painting of Vairocanābhisambodhi and 
the eight great bodhisattvas (the deities are 
identified by accompanying Chinese inscrip -
tions), Yulin Cave 25 , Tibetan period, late 8th 
century, Fig. 3.1 .
3) A portable painting of the Amoghapāśa 
maṇḍala, f
rom Mogao Cave 17 , 8th or 9th 
century, Musée Guimet, MG 26466 , Fig. 3.14 . 
4) A portable painting labelled as ‘the Pure Land 
of Bhaiṣajyaguru’ , from Mogao Cave 17 , dated 
836, British Museum, Ch.xxxvii.004 , Fig. 3.22.
5) Two wall paintings depicting ma ṇḍala-li ke 
compositions centred around Vairocanābhi-  
sambodhi and Vajrasattva, Mogao Cave 14 , 
second half of the 9 th century, Figs. 3.12 and 
3.13.
6) A portable painting depicting a heavenly 
assembly, from Mogao Cave 17 , 9th century, 
British Museum, Ch.ivi.0034 .
7) A portable painting depicting Mañjuśrī riding 
a lion, from Mogao Cave 17 , 9th century, 
British Museum, Ch.XXVI.a.007 .
8) Four large images of seated Avalokiteśvara 
with four Offering Goddesses, painted on four 
slopes of the ceiling, Mogao Cave 161 , 9th or 
10th century, discussed in Wang 2018 : 145–150 , 
Figs. 63–66 .
9) Two wall paintings depicting ma ṇḍala-li ke 
compositions centred around Vairocanābhi-  
sambodhi and a buddha, Yulin Cave 20 , 9th 
century.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   117 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 122] ---
Yury Khokhlov118
10) A portable painting depicting a standing figure 
of Samantabhadra, from Mogao Cave 17 , 9th 
or 10th century, Musée Guimet, MG. 17770, 
Fig. 3.19 .
11) A portable painting depicting a standing 
bodhisattva, from Mogao Cave 17 , 9th or 10 th 
century, British Museum, Ch.Iv. 007 .
12) A portable painting depicting a standing 
bodhisattva, from Mogao Cave 17 , 9th or 10 th 
century, British Museum, Ch.Iv.0031 .
13) A portable painting depicting a standing 
bodhisattva, from Mogao Cave 17 , 9th or 10 th 
century, British Museum, Ch.Iv.004 .
14) A portab
le painting depicting a seated figure 
of Avalokiteśvara, from Mogao Cave 17 , dated 
by the museum to the 9 th century but likely 
belonging to the 10 th century, British Museum, 
Ch.00401 .
15) A portable painting depicting seated bodhisat-
tva, from Mogao Cave 17 , dated by the museum 
to the 9 th century but likely belonging to the 
10th century, British Museum, Ch.00377 .
16) A portable painting depicting a ma ṇḍala of  
Avalokiteśvara, from Mogao Cave 17 , dated 
by the museum to the 8 th century but likely 
belonging to the 10 th century, British Museum, 
Ch.xxii.0017 .
17) A portable painting depicting a ma ṇḍala of  
Avalokiteśvara, from Mogao Cave 17 , dated 
by the museum to the 8 th or 9 th century but 
likely belonging to the 10 th century, British 
Museum, Ch.Iv.0024 .
18) A portable painting of Vairocanābhisambodhi 
and the eight great bodhisattvas (the deities 
are partially identified by Tibetan inscriptions), 
from Mogao Cave 17, late 9 th or early 10th 
century, British Museum, Ch.0074 , Fig. 3.8 .
19) A portable painting of the Amoghapāśa 
maṇḍala, from Mogao Cave 17 , 10th century , 
Musée Guimet, EO.3579 .
20) A portab
le painting of Amoghapāśa ma ṇḍala, 
from Mogao Cave 17 , dated by the museum 
to the 8th century but likely belonging to the 
10th century, Musée Guimet, EO.1131 .
21) A portab
le painting of the ten stages of bodhi-
sattvahood, from Mogao Cave 17 , 10th century, 
Musée Guimet, MG. 26465 , Fig. 3.23 .22) Two wall paintings depicting ma ṇḍala-li ke 
compositions centred around Vairocanābhi-  
sambodhi and a buddha, Yulin Cave 38 , 10th 
or 11 th century.
23) Wall paintings inside the Heavenly King 
stūpa (Ch. 天王堂 ) at Mogao, 10 th century. 
The content was only partially published and 
includes:
 –  six multi-ar med deities, each surrounded 
by four Offering Goddesses/Bodhisattvas, 
painted on the ceiling. 
 –  eight stan
ding bodhisattvas and four heav-
enly kings painted on the walls.
 Discus
sed in Dunhuang Academy 2003 : 197–
212.
24) A portab
le painting (fragment) of a ma ṇḍala, 
from Mogao Cave 17 , 10th century, Indian 
National Museum, Ch.00383  c, discussed in 
Klimburg-Salter 1982 : 137 , plates 62 , 63.
25) A wooden stupa reliquary, found at Yulin, 10th 
century, Gansu Provincial Museum, discussed 
in Shen and Gardner Gates 2016 : 28, fig. 8.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016. Esoteric Buddhism in Medi-
aeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters,  
Texts, Icons. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak 
Institute.
. 2018. ‘Maritime Buddhism’, in Oxford Re -
search Encyclopedia of Religion . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. [Last accessed 14 November 
2019 at: http://oxfordre.com/religion/view/  
10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.001.0001/acre -
fore-9780199340378-e-638] 
Aiyappan, Ayinapalli and P.R. Srinivasan. 2000. 
Story of Buddhism with Special Reference 
to South India. Chennai: Commissioner of 
Museums, Govt. Museum.
Almogi, Orna. 2008. ‘How Authentic are Titles and 
Colophons of Tantric Works in the Tibetan 
Canon? The Case of Three Works and Their 
Authors and Translators’, Beitrage Zur Zen- 
tralasienforschung 14: 87–124.
Asha Rani, Mathur. 1988. The Great Traditions: 
Indian Bronze Masterpieces. New Delhi: Fes -
tival of India.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   118 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 123] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 119
Auboyer, Jeannine. 1941. Les Influences et les Ré -
miniscences Étangères au Kondō Du Hōry ūji, 
Dessins de l’Auteur.  Paris: P. Geuthner.
Barber, A.W. 2008. ‘Two Mahāyāna Developments 
Along the Krishna River’, in Sree Padma (Holt) 
and A.W. Barber (eds.), Buddhism in the Krishna 
River Valley of Andhra, pp. 151–167.  Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 1997. ‘Le groupe des 
huits grandes bodhisatva en Inde: genèse et 
développement’, in Natasha Eilenberg (ed.), 
Living a Life in Accord with the Dhamma: 
Papers in Honor of Professor Jean Boisselier 
on his Eightieth Birthday , pp. 1–55. Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University. 
. 2000. ‘Nasik: The Late Mahâyâna Caves 2, 
15, 20 & 23-24’, in European Association of 
South Asian Archaeologists, Maurizio Taddei 
and Giuseppe De Marco (eds.), South Asian 
Archaeology 1997: Proceedings of the Fourteenth 
International Conference of the European As -
sociation of South Asian Archaeologists, held in 
the Istituto italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente, 
Palazzo Brancaccio, Rome, 7–14 July 1997 ,  
pp. 1201–1227. Rome: Istituto Italiano per l’Af -
rica e l’Oriente.
. 2002. ‘Nidhis and other images of richness 
and fertility in Ajanta’, East and West  52: 225–
284.
. 2008. ‘Antagonistes et complémentaires, le 
lion et l’éléphantdans la personnalité du 
Buddha’, in Nalini Balbir and Georges-Jean 
Pinault (eds.), Penser, dire et repr ésente r l’animal 
dans le monde indien , pp. 523–572. Paris: Li -
brairie Honoré Champion, Éditeur.
. 2015. The Forgotten Place: Stone Images 
from Kurkihar, Bihar . New Delhi: Archaeolog -
ical Survey of India.
Beckwith, Christopher. 1983. ‘The Revolt of 755 in 
Tibet’, in Ernst Steinkener and Helmut Taus -
cher (eds.), Contributions on Tibetan Language, 
History, and Culture: Proceedings of the Csoma 
de Koros Symposium Held at Velm—Vienna , 
Austria , Vol. I, pp. 1–16. Vienna: Arbeitskreis 
fur Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien Uni -
versität Wien. 
Bopearachchi, Osmund. 2014. ‘Sri Lanka and the 
Maritime Trade: Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara as the Protector of Mariners’, in Parul Pandya 
Dhar and Upinder Singh (eds.), Asian Encoun -
ters: Exploring Connected Histories , pp. 161–187. 
New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Brauen, Martin. 1997. The Mandala: Sacred Circle in 
Tibetan Buddhism. 1st ed. Boston: Shambhala.
Chou, Yi-liang. 1945. ‘Tantrism in China’, Harvard 
Journal of Asiatic Studies 8/3–4: 241–332.
Cleary, Thomas F. 1993. The Flower Ornament 
Scripture.  Boston: Shambhala.
Dalton, Jacob P. 2011. The Taming of the Demons: 
Violence and Liberation in Tibetan Buddhism. 
New Haven and London: Yale University  
Press.
. 2017. ‘On the Significance of the Ārya-
tattvasaṃgraha-sādhanopāyikā and Its Com -
mentary’, in Yael Bentor and Meir Shahar (eds.), 
Chinese and Tibetan Esoteric Buddhism ,  
pp. 321–337. Leiden: Brill.
Dalton, Jacob P. and Sam van Schaik. 2006. 
Tibetan Tantric Manuscripts from Dunhuang: A  
Descriptive Catalogue of the Stein Collection  
at the British Library . Leiden and Boston:  
Brill.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Bud -
dhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement . 
New York: Columbia University Press.
. 2005. Tibetan Renaissance: Tantric Bud -
dhism in the Rebirth of Tibetan Culture . New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Dayalan, Duraiswamy. n.d. Art, Architecture 
and Cultural Link Between Maharastra and South India (Andhra Pradesh & Tamil 
Nadu). [Last accessed 24 November 2020 at: 
https://www.academia.edu/25250507/ART_ 
ARCHITECTURE_AND_CULTURAL_
LINK_BETWEEN_MAHARASHTRA_AND_
SOUTH_INDIA_ANDHRA_PRADESH_and_
TAMIL_NADU]
de Visser, Marinus Willem. 1915. The Bodhisttva 
Ti-tsang (Jiz ō) in Chin a and Japan . Berlin: Oes -
terheld & Co. Verlag (Erste Sonderveröffentli -
chung der Ostasiatischen Zeitschrift).
Debreczeny, Karl. 2011. ‘Wutai Shan: Pilgrimage 
to Five-Peak Mountain’, Journal of the Inter -
national Association of Tibetan Studies 6: 1–133.
. 2019. ‘Faith and Empire: An Overview’, in 
Karl Debreczeny (ed.), Faith and Empire: Art 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   119 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 124] ---
Yury Khokhlov120
and Politics in Tibetan Buddhism , pp. 17–53. 
New York: Rubin Museum of Art.
Dessein, Bart. 2003. ‘The Glow of the Vow of 
the Teacher Samantabhadra “Puxian Pusa 
Xingyuan Zan” (T.297) Samantabhadra -
caryāpra ṇidhānarāja ’, Ac ta Orientalia Aca -
demiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 56/2–4: 317–338.
Dohanian, Diran K. 1977. The Mahāyāna Bud -
dhist Sculpture of Ceylon. New York: Garland  
House.
. 1983. ‘Sinhalese Sculptures in the Pallava 
Style’, Archives of Asian Art 36: 6–21.
Dunhuang Academy (Dunhuang yanjiuyuan) (eds.). 
2003. The Complete Collection of Dunhuang 
Grottoes (Dunhuang Shiku Quanji).  Hong Kong: 
The Commercial Press (Shangwu yinshuguan).
. 2013. Chinese Grottoes: Dunhuang Mogao 
Grottoes, Volume 4. (Zhongguo shiku: Dun -
huang Mogaoku (si)) . 2nd ed. Beijing: Cultural 
Relics Publisher (Wenwu chubanshe).
. 2014. The Yulin Grottoes (Yulin Ku) . Nanjing: 
Jiangsu Arts Publisher (Jiangsu meishu chu -
banshe).
Fontein, Jan. 1968. The Pilgrimage of Sudhana: A 
Study of Gaṇḍavy ūha Illus trations in China, 
Japan and Java. The Hague: Mouton.
. 2012. Entering the Dharmadhātu: A Study 
of the Gandavyūha Reliefs of Borobudur (Studies 
in Asian Art and Archaeology, vol. 26). Leiden 
and Boston: Brill.
Fraser, Sarah E. 2004. Performing the Visual: The 
Practice of Buddhist Wall Painting in China and 
Central Asia, 618–960 . Stanford,  CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Gentry, James. 2019. ‘An Inquiry into Source-Text 
Multilingualism in Tibetan Scriptural Trans -
lations’. Abstract of a talk delivered at the 15th 
Seminar of the International Association for 
Tibetan Studies in Paris, July 2019. [Last ac -
cessed 24 November 2020 at: https://www.aca -
demia.edu/39792552/An_Inquiry_into_Source 
Text_Multilingualism_in_Tibetan_Scriptur -
al_Translations]  
Giebel, Rolf W. 1995. ‘The Chin-kang-ting ching 
yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei: An Annotated 
Translation’, Journal of Naritasan Institute for 
Buddhist Studies  18: 107–201.. 2001. Two Esoteric Sutras: The Adamantine 
Pinnacle Sutra, the Susiddhikara Sutra . Berke -
ley, California: Numata Center for Buddhist 
Translation and Research.
Goble, Geoffrey. 2012. Chinese Esoteric Buddhism: 
Amoghavajra and the Ruling Elite . PhD thesis, 
Indiana University.
. 2013. ‘The Legendary Siege of Anxi: Myth, 
History, and Truth in Chinese Buddhism’, 
Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Bud -
dhist Studies 3/15: 1–32.
Govinda, Li Gotami. 1979. Tibet in Pictures: Text 
and Photos. Berkeley, CA: Dharma Pub.
Granoff, Phyllis. 1968/1969. ‘A Portable Buddhist 
Shrine from Central Asia’, Archives of Asian 
Art 22: 80–95.
Guy, John. 1994. ‘The Lost Temples of Nagapat -
tinam and Quanzhou: A Study in Sino-Indian 
Relations’, in Silk Road Art and Archeology 3: 
291–310.
. 1995. ‘The Avalokitesvara of Yunnan and 
Some South East Asian Connections’, in Rose -
mary Scott and John Guy (eds.), South East 
Asia and China: Art, Commerce and Interaction , 
Percival David Foundation Colloquies on Art 
and Archeology of Asia , pp. 64–83. London: 
University of London.
. 2014. ‘Introducing Early Southeast Asia’, 
in John Guy (ed.), Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Bud -
dhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . New 
York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Heller, Amy. 1994. ‘Ninth Century Buddhist Images 
Carved at Ldan Ma Brag to Commemorate 
Tibeto-Chinese Negotiations’, in Per Kvaerne 
(ed.), Tibetan Studies: Proceedings of the 6th 
Seminar of the International Association for 
Tibetan Studies, Fagernes, 1992 , pp. 335–349 . 
Oslo: Institute for Comparative Research in 
Human Culture.
. 1997. ‘P.T. 7A, P.T. 108, P.T. 240 and Beijing 
Bstan ‘gyur 3489: Ancient Tibetan Rituals Ded -
icated to Vairocana’, in Gene Smith (ed.), The 
Pandita and the Siddha: Tibetan Studies in 
Honor of E. Gene Smith , pp. 85–91 . Dharamsa -
la: Amnye Machen Institute.
. 2002. ‘The Paintings of Gra thang: History 
and Iconography of an 11th Century Tibetan 
Temple’, Tibet Journal 27/1–2: 39–72.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   120 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 125] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 121
Horlemann, Bianca. 2012. ‘Buddhist Sites in Amdo 
and former Longyou from the 8th to the 13th 
Century’, in Cristina Scherrer-Schaub (ed.), 
PIATS Oxford 2003, Old Tibetan Studies Ded-
icated to the Memory of Ronald E. Emmerick , 
pp. 119–157 . Leiden: Brill.
Hunter, Harriet. 2018. A Transmission and Its Trans -
formation: The Liqujing Shibahui Mantuluo in 
Daigoji Research . PhD dissertation, Leiden 
University.
Huntington, John C. 1981. ‘Cave Six at Aurangabad: 
A Tantrayana Monument?’ in J.G. Williams 
(ed.), Kalādarśana: Am erican Studies in the Art 
of India , pp. 47–55. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Huo, Wei. 2017. ‘Archaeological Investigation on 
Parinirvana in Yushu of Qinghai and New 
Findings (Qinghai Yushu darirulai fotang de 
kaogu diaocha yu xinfaxian)’, Qinghai Ethnic 
Research  (Qinghai minzu yanjiu)  28/1: 4–9. 
. 2018. ‘Rock Reliefs in East Tibet and Yizhou 
in the Context of Cultural Exchanges between 
Tang and Tubo’, Journal of Tibetology 16: 301–313.
Indrapala, Karthigesu. 2005. The Evolution of an 
Ethnic Identity: The Tamils in Sri Lanka c.300 
BCE to c.1200 CE . Sydney: MV Publications for 
the South Asian Study Centre.
Kapstein, Matthew T. 2000. The Tibetan Assimi-
lation of Buddhism: Conversion, Contestation, 
and Memory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
. 2004. ‘The Treaty Temple of De-Ga G.Yu-
Tshal: Identification and Iconography’, in Huo 
Wei and Y. Li (eds.), Tibetan Archaeology and 
Art (Xizang Kaogu Yu Yishu), pp. 98–127. 
Chengdu: Sichuan renmin chubanshe.
. 2009. ‘The Treaty Temple of the Turquoise 
Grove’, in Matthew T. Kapstein (ed.), Buddhism 
Between Tibet and China, pp. 21–72. Boston: 
Wisdom Publications.
. 2014. ‘The Treaty Temple of De ga g.yu 
tshal: Reconsiderations’,  Journal of Tibetology 
10: 32–34.
Karmay, Heather. 1975. Early Sino-Tibetan Art. 
Warminster: Aris and Philips lts.
Karmay, Samten Gyaltsen. 2007. The Great Perfec -
tion (rDzogs chen): A Philosophical and Medi -
tative Teaching of Tibetan Buddhism. Leiden 
and Boston: Brill.Khokhlov, Yury. 2018. ‘From India to the Doorstep 
of China: Indian Pāla Style in the Hexi Corri -
dor’, unpublished paper based on a talk given at 
The Silk Road and the Art of the Tibetan Plateau 
Forum (Pāla Art and its Influence in China,  
青藏高原絲路與藝術論壇 —波羅藝術與中國 ), 
Asia Society, Hong Kong, 26–27 May 2018.  
[Abstract last accessed 14 November 2019 at: 
https://www.academia.edu/36748689/From_
India_to_the_Doorstep_of_China_Indian_
Pala_Style_in_the_Hexi_Corridor ]
. 2019. ‘Uncovering Amoghavajra’s Legacy 
in the Hexi Corridor and Tibet’, Journal of Ti -
betology 21: 48–133.
Klimburg-Salter, Deborah E. 1982. The Silk Route 
and the Diamond Path: Esoteric Buddhist Art on 
the Trans-Himalayan Trade Routes . Los Angeles: 
UCLA Art Council.
Klimburg-Salter, Deborah E. and Christian 
Luczanits. 1998. Tabo: A Lamp for the Kingdom: 
Early-Indo-Tibetan Buddhist Art in the Western 
Himalaya. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Lee, Sonya S. 2010. Surviving Nirvana: Death of the 
Buddha in Chinese Visual Culture. Hong Kong: 
Hong Kong University Press.
Li, Channa. 2016. ‘Translationship Lost in Trans -
mission: Elusive Attributions of Two Tibetan 
Sūtra Translations’, Revue d’ Études T
ibétaine
s 
37: 207–230.
Lin Li-Kuang. 1935. ‘Puṇyodaya (Na-t’i), un pro -
pagateur du tantrisme en Chine et au Cam -
bodge à l’époque de Hiuan-tsang’, Journal 
Asiatique  227: 83–100.
Lin Wei-Cheng. 2014. Building a Sacred Mountain: 
The Buddhist Architecture of China’s Mount 
Wutai. Seattle: University of Washington  
Press.
Linrothe, Robert N. 2014. ‘What They Saw: Kaśmīrā 
in the Eyes of Western Himalayas’, in Collect-
ing Paradise: Buddhist Art of Kashmir and its 
Legacies , exh. cat., pp. 29–107. New York: Rubin 
Museum of Art.
Liu Yongzhen. 2008. ‘Explanation of the Ceiling 
Images in the Southern and Northern Alcoves 
of Mogao Cave 148 (Mogaoku di 148 ku nan -
beikan tianjing tuxiang jieshuo)’, in Duhuang 
Research Academy (ed.), The Inheritance and 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   121 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 126] ---
Yury Khokhlov122
Innovation of Dunhuang Wall Art: Proceedings 
of the International Conference (Duhunag Bihua 
Yishu Jicheng yu Chuangxin: Guoyi Xueshu 
Yantaohui Lunwenji), pp. 518–536. Shanghai: 
Shanghai cishu chubanshe.
Lo Bue, Erberto. 2000. Tibet: Templi scomparsi 
fotografati da Fosco Maraini. Torino: Ananke.
Lokesh Chandra. 1980. ‘Oḍḍiyāna: A New Inter -
pretation’, in Michael Aris and Aung San Suu 
Kyi (eds.), Tibetan Studies in Honour of Hugh 
Richardson, pp. 73–78. Warminster and Oxford: 
Aris and Phillips.
Long, Mark. 2009. Ca ṇḍi Mendut: Womb of the 
Tathāgata, written, compiled, translated and 
illustrated. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Malandra, Gery Hockfield. 1993. Unfolding a 
Mandala: The Buddhist Cave Temples at Ellora. 
Suny Series in Buddhist Studies. Albany, N.Y.: 
State University of New York Press.
. 1996. ‘The Mandala at Ellora/Ellora in the 
Mandala’, Journal of the International Associa-
tion of Buddhist Studies 19: 181–207.
McCoy, Michelle. 2016. ‘Maṇḍala of Avalokiteśvara 
of the Unfailing Lasso (Amoghapāśa)’, in 
Neville Agnew, Marcia Reed and Tevvy Ball 
(eds.), Cave Temples of Dunhuang: Buddhist Art 
of China’s Silk Road, pp. 236–239. Los Angeles: 
J. Paul Getty Trust.
McNair, Amy. 2007. Donors of Longmen: Faith, 
Politics, and Patronage in Medieval Chinese Buddhist Sculpture. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press.
Misra, R.N. 1981. Yaksha Cult and Iconography. New 
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Nagasawa, Jake. 2017. [Last accessed 14 November 
2019 at: https://treasuryoflives.org/biographies/
view/Buddhaguhya/10546]
Okada, Ken. 2004. ‘Observations on Buddhist 
Stone Sculptures from the Longxing Monas-
tery’, in Xiaoneng Yang (ed.), New Perspectives 
on China’s Past: Chinese Archaeology in the 
Twentieth Century, pp. 381–391. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press.
Orzech, Charles D. 1995. ‘The Legend of the Iron 
Stūpa’, in Donald S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Buddhism 
in Practice, pp. 314–317. NJ: Princeton University 
Press.. 1996. ‘Maṇḍalas on the Move: Reflections 
from Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Circa 800’, 
Journal of the International Association of Bud-
dhist Studies 19: 209–245.
. 1998. Politics and Transcendent Wisdom:  
The Scripture for Humane Kings in the Creation 
of Chinese Buddhism. University Park: The 
Pensilvania State University Press.
. 2006. ‘The “Great Teaching of Yoga,” the 
Chinese Appropriation of the Tantras, and the 
Question of Esoteric Buddhism’, Journal of 
Chinese Religions 34: 29–78. 
Orzech, Charles D., Henrik H. Sørensen, and 
Richard K. Payne (eds.). 2011. Esoteric Buddhism 
and the Tantras in East Asia. Leiden and Boston: 
Brill.
Osto, Douglas. 2004. The Ga ṇḍavyūha-sūtra: A 
Study of Wealth, Gender and Power in an Indian 
Buddhist Narrative. PhD dissertation, School 
of Oriental and African Studies, University of 
London.
. 2010. ‘A New Translation of the Sanskrit 
Bhadracarī with Introduction and Notes’, New 
Zealand Journal of Asian Studies 12/2: 1–21.
Owen, Lisa N. 2010. ‘Demarcating Sacred Space: 
The Jina Images at Kalugumalai’, International 
Journal of Jaina Studies 6/4: 1–28.
. 2012. Carving Devotion in the Jain Caves at 
Ellora. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Padma, Sree and A.W. Barber. 2008. Buddhism in 
the Krishna River Valley of Andhra. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Rao, Gopinatha T.A. 1915. ‘Bauddha Vestiges in 
Kanchipura’, Indian Antiquary 44: 127–129.
Reis Habito, Maria. 1999. ‘The Amoghapāśa 
Kalparāja Sūtra: A Historical and Analytical 
Study’, Studies in Central and East Asian Re -
ligions 11: 39–67.
Revire, Nicolas. 2012. ‘New Perspectives on the 
Origin and Spread of Bhadrāsana Buddhas 
throughout Southeast Asia (7th–8th centuries)’, 
in Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz, Andreas Reinecke and 
Dominik Bonatz (eds.), Connecting Empires and 
States: Selected Papers from the 13th Conference 
of the European Association of Southeast Asian 
Archaeologists, Vol. 2, pp. 127–143. Singapore: 
NUS Press.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   122 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 127] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 123
Rhie, Marilyn M. 1988. Interrelationships between 
the Buddhist Art of China and the Art of India 
and Central Asia from 618-755 A.D. Napoli: Is-
tituto Universitario Orientale.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. ‘The Śaiva Exegesis of 
Kashmir’, in Dominic Goodall and André 
Padoux (eds.), M élanges tantriques à la m émoire 
d’Hélène Brunner: Tantric Studies in Memory 
of H élène Brunner, pp. 231–442. Pondicherry:  
Institut français de Pondich éry/École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Schmid, Neil. 2006. ‘The Material Culture of Exe -
gesis and Liturgy and a Change in the Artistic 
Representations in Dunhuang Caves, ca.700-
1000’, Asia Major , 3rd series, Vol. 19, No. 1/2 
(China at the Crossroads: A Festschrift in Honor 
of Victor H. Mair ), pp. 171–210.
. 2011. ‘Dunhuang and Central Asia’, in 
Charles Orzech, Henrik Sørensen and Richard 
Payne (eds.), Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras 
in East Asia , pp. 365–374.  Leiden and Boston: 
Brill.
Sen, Tansen. 2016. Buddhism, Diplomacy, and 
Trade: The Realignment of India-China Rela -
tions, 600–1400. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.
Sha Wutian. 2013. Studies on Dunhuang Grottoes 
during the Tubo Period ( Tubo Tongzhi Shiqi 
Dunhuang Shiku Yanjiu). Beijing: Zhongguo 
shehui kexue chubanshe.
Shanxi Province Academy of Archaeology and 
TAR Relics Preservation Institute (Shanxisheng 
kaogu yanjiuyuan, Xizang zizhiqu wenwu 
baohu yanjiusuo).  2014. ‘Archaeological Report 
on Brag gYab County lDan Ma Brag Cliff Carv -
ings (Xizang chayaxian danzha moya zaoxiang 
kaogu diaocha jianbao)’, Archaeology and Relics 
(Kaogu yu wenwu)  6: 7–14.
Sharf, Robert. 2017. ‘Buddhist Veda and the Rise 
of Chan’, in Yael Bentor and Meir Shahar 
(eds.), Chinese and Tibetan Esoteric Buddhism ,  
pp. 85–120. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Sharrock, Peter D. and Emma C. Bunker. 2016. 
‘Seeds of Vajrabodhi: Buddhist Ritual Bronzes 
from Java and Khorat’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia : 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons , pp. 237–252. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.Shen, Hsueh-man. 2019. Authentic Replicas: Bud-
dhist Art in Medieval China. Honolulu: Uni -
versity of Hawai‘i Press.
Shen, Hsueh-man and Mimi Gardner Gates. 2016. 
‘The Buddhist Cave Temples in Dunhuang 
Art, Spirituality, Cultural Heritage’, in Neville 
Agnew, Marcia Reed, and Tevvy Ball (eds.), 
Cave Temples of Dunhuang: Buddhist Art of 
China’s Silk Road, pp. 139–165. Los Angeles: J. 
Paul Getty Trust.
Shim, Yeoung Shin. 2013. Four Heavenly Kings: 
Iconography and Symbolism seen Through Lit -
erary Evidence and Imagery. PhD thesis, The 
University of Pennsylvania.
Skilling, Peter. 2011. ‘Buddhism and the Circulation 
of Ritual in Early Peninsular Southeast Asia’, 
in Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani, and Geoff  
Wade (eds.), Early Interactions between South 
and Southeast Asia: Reflections on Cross-cultur -
al Exchange , pp. 371–384. Singapore: Institute 
of Southeast Asian Studies.
Snellgrove, David L. 1978. The Image of the Buddha. 
London: Serindia Publications/UNESCO.
. 1987. Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Bud-
dhists and their Tibetan Successors . London: 
Serindia Publications.
Soper, Alexander C. 1960. ‘South Chinese Influ -
ence on the Buddhist Art of the Six Dynasties 
Period’, Bulletin of the Museum of Far Eastern 
Antiquities 32: 47–112.
Sørensen, Henrik H. 2000. ‘Perspectives on Bud -
dhism in Dunhuang during the Tang and Five 
Dynasties Period’, in Vadime Elisseeff (ed.), The 
Silk Roads: Highways of Culture and  Commerce , 
pp. 27–48.  New York and Oxford: Berghahn 
Books.
. 2011. ‘Central Divinities in Esoteric Bud -
dhist Pantheon in China’, in Charles Orzech, 
Henrik Sørensen, and Richard Payne (eds.), 
Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia , 
pp. 90–132. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Sørensen, Per. 1994. The Mirror Illuminating the 
Royal Genealogies: Tibetan Buddhist Historiog -
raphy: An Annotated Translation of the XIVth 
century Tibetan Chronicle: rGyal-rabs gsal- ba’i 
me-long. Weisbaden: Harrassowitz.
Srinivasan, Sharada. 1999. ‘Lead Isotope and Trace 
Element Analysis in the Study of over One 
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   123 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 128] ---
Yury Khokhlov124
Hundred South Indian Metal Icons’, Archae -
ometry 41: 91–116.
Stoddard, Heather. 2018. ‘Drathang Monastery’, 
in Thomas Liard, Robert Thurman, Heather 
Stoddard, Cameron Bailey, and Jakob Winkler 
(eds.), Murals of Tibet , pp. 96–105. Milan, New 
York, Berlin, London: Taschen.
Sundberg, Jeffrey R. and Rolf Giebel. 2011. ‘The 
Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi as 
Chronicled by Lü Xiang ( 呂向 ): South Indian 
and Śrī Laṅkān Antecedents to the Arrival of 
the Buddhist Vajrayāna in Eighth-Century Java 
and China’, Pacific World: Journal of the Insti -
tute of Buddhist Studies 13/3: 129–222.
Takata, Tokio. 2019. ‘Tibetan Dominion over Dun -
huang and the Formation of a Tibeto-Chinese 
Community’, in Erika Forte (ed.), Buddhist 
Road Paper 6.1 . Special Issue: Central Asian 
Networks. Rethinking the Interplay of Religions, 
Art and Politics Across the Tarim Basin (5th–10th 
c.), pp. 85–106.
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2000. Tonk ō: Mikky ō to bij
utsu 
敦煌 : 密教と美術 . Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
. 2018. An Illustrated History of the Maṇḍala: 
From its Genesis to the K ālacak ratantra. Boston: 
Wisdom Publications. 
Thapar, Romila. 2003. Early India: From the Origins 
to AD 1300. Berkeley, CA: University of Cali -
fornia Press.
Toyka-Fuong, Ursula. 1998. ‘The Influence of Pāla 
Art on 11th-Century Wall-Painting of Grotto 
76 in Dunhuang’, in Deborah Klimburg-Salter 
and Eva Allinger (eds.), The Inner Asian Inter -
national Style 12th-14th Centuries , pp. 67–96. 
Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.
van der Kuijp, Leonard W.J. 1992. ‘Notes Apropos 
of the Transmission of the Sarvadurgatipariśo- 
dhanatantra  in Tibet’, Studien zur Indologie 
und Iranistik 16: 109–125.
van Schaik, Sam. 2015. Tibetan Zen: Discovering  
a Lost Tradition . Boston and London: Snow 
Lion.
van Schaik, Sam and Lewis Doney. 2007. ‘The 
Prayer, the Priest, and the Tsenpo: An Early 
Buddhist Narrative from Dunhuang’, Journal 
of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 30/1–2: 175–217.van Schaik, Sam and Imre Galambos. 2012. Man -
uscripts and Travellers: The Sino-Tibetan Doc -
uments of a Tenth-Century Buddhist Pilgrim. 
Berlin: De Gruyter.
Verardi, Giovanni. 2018. The Gods and the Here -
tics: Crisis and Ruin of Indian Buddhism . New 
Delhi and Buenos Aires: Aditya Prakashan and 
Fundación Bodhiyāna.
Vitali, Roberto. 1990. Early Temples of Central Tibet.  
London: Serindia Publications.
von der Schulenburg, Stephan, Elke Hessel, Karsten 
Schmidt, and Matthias Wagner (eds.). 2015. 
Buddha: 108 Begegnungen/Encounters.  Köln: 
Wienand Verlag.
von Schroeder, Ulrich. 1990. Buddhist Sculptures 
of Sri Lanka. Hong Kong: Visual Dharma Pub -
lications.
. 2001. Buddhist Sculptures in Tibet.  Hong 
Kong: Visual Dharma Publications.
Wade, Geoff. 2014. ‘Beyond the Southern Borders: 
Southeast Asia in Chinese Texts to the Ninth 
Century’, in John Guy (ed.), Lost Kingdoms: 
Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast 
Asia . New York: Metropolitan Museum of  
Art.
Wang, Eugene Y. 2005. Shaping the Lotus Sutra 
Buddhist Visual Culture in Medieval China . 
Seattle and London: University of Washington  
Press.
Wang, Michelle C. 2018. Maṇḍalas in the Making: 
The Visual Culture of Esoteric Buddhism at 
Dunhuang. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Wangdu, Pasang and Hildegard Diemberger. 2000. 
dBa’ bzhed: The Royal Narrative Concerning 
the Bringing of the Buddha’s Doctrine to Tibet. 
Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.
Wayman, Alex and Ryujun Tajima. 1998. The En -
lightenment of Vairocana. Delhi: Motilal Ba -
narsidass Publishers.
Weinberger, Steven N. 2003. The Significance of 
Yoga Tantra and the Compendium of Princi -
ples (Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra) within Tantric 
Buddhism in India and Tibet . PhD dissertation, 
University of Virginia.
. 2010. ‘The Yoga Tantras and the Social 
Context of Their Transmission to Tibet’, Chung-
Hwa Buddhist Journal 23: 131–166.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   124 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 129] ---
In the Footsteps of Amoghavajra (705–774 ) 125
Wessels-Mevissen, Corinna. 2001. The Gods of the 
Directions in Ancient India: Origin and Early 
Development in Art and Literature (Until c. 1000 
A.D.). Monographien zur indischen Archäo-  
logie, Kunst und Philologie, Band 14. Berlin: 
Dietrich Reimer Verlag.
Whitfield,  Roderik. 1982–1986.  Art of Central Asia: 
The Stein Collection in the British Museum . 3 
vols. Tokyo: Kodansha International, in coop -
eration with the Trustees of the British Museum.
Wong, Dorothy C. 1993. ‘A Reassessment of the 
Representation of Mt Wutai from Dunhuang 
Cave 61’, Archives of Asian Art 46:  27–52.
. 2007a. ‘The Case of Amoghapāśa’, Journal 
of Inner Asian Art and Archeology 2: 151–158.
. 2007b. ‘The Huayan/Kegon/Hwaŏm Paint -
ings in East Asia’, in Imre Hamar (ed.), Reflect -
ing Mirrors: Perspectives on Huayan Buddhism, 
pp. 337–384. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
. 2008. ‘Reassessing the Wall Paintings of 
Hōry ūji’, in Dor othy C. Wong and Eric M. Field 
(eds.),  Hōry ūji Recon sidered , pp. 131–198. New -
castle: Cambridge Scholars.
. 2012. ‘The Art of Avataṃsaka Buddhism 
at the Courts of Empress Wu and Emperor 
Shōmu/Empress Kōmyō’, in Imre Hamar and Robert M. Gimello (eds.), Avataṃsaka Bud -
dhism in East Asia: Huayan, Kegon, Flower 
Ornament Buddhism: Origins and Adaptation 
of a Visual Culture, pp. 223–260. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz Verlag.
. 2018. Buddhist Pilgrim-Monks as Agents of 
Cultural and Artistic Transmission: The Inter -
national Buddhist Art Style in East Asia, ca. 
645–770.  Singapore: NUS Press.
Wong, Dorothy C. and Eric M. Field. 2008. Hōry ūji 
Reconsidered. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars.
Yang Qingfan, Lu Suwen, and Zhang Yanqing. 2017. 
‘Archaeological Report on the Newly Discovered 
Tubo Dynasty Rock Sculptures in the Town 
of Sgar thog in Smar khams County, Tibet’, 
Journal of Tibetology 16: 233–251.
Yang, Zeng. 2018. A Biographical Study on Bukong 
不空  (aka. Amoghavajra, 705–774): Networks, 
Institutions, and Identities . PhD thesis, The 
University of British Columbia.
Zhang Wenbin (ed.). 2000. A Centennial Com -
memoration of the Discovery of the Cave Library 
(Dunhuang: jinian Dunhuang zangjingdong 
faxian yibai zhounian) . Beijing: Chaohua chu -
banshe.
03_CreSouthV1_8P_3Feb22.indd   125 3/2/22   6:20 PM

--- [Page 130] ---
peter sharrockChapter 4
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia1
introduction
Herukas,2 fierce icons of the supreme 
Buddhas of the esoteric Vajrayāna (‘thun-
derbolt’) vehicle, emerged as key sote -
riological aids in the monasteries of northern 
India under the Pāla dynasty (8th–11 th centuries). 
Recent archaeological research suggests that they 
achieved a second, quite different florescence as 
instruments of royal power in the 11 th–15 th cen -
turies across Maritime Asia. Even as the Herukas 
headed towards extinction under armed Islam in 
the great monasteries of Bengal and Bihar in the 
1. My thanks for incisive comments on the chapter go 
to Andrea Acri, Iain Sinclair, Swati Chemburkar, Olivier 
Cunin, Shivani Kapoor, and two peer reviewers.
2. Heruk
as are a class of fierce deities emitted into the 
saṃsāra  by the Ādi-Buddha Vajrasattva or Akṣobhya, 
head of the vajra  clan and Jina of the eastern universe. 
Their manifestations, appearing first in the Sarvabud -
dhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara , include Cakrasaṃvara 
and the eight-headed, sixteen-armed Hevajra, who is the 
principal Heruka of Khmer Esoteric Buddhism found in 
the material record. See de Mallmann 1986: 182, and Das -
gupta 1950: 98: ‘This Vajra-sattva, the Lord Supreme of 
the Tantric Buddhists, is found in the Buddhist Tantras 
bearing many other names of which the most important 
are Hevajra and Heruka.’ Alexis Sanderson (2009: 148, n. 
340) adds: ‘The origin of the name Heruka has not been 
explained in a satisfactory manner. Indigenous sources 
explain it only through artificial semantic analyses based on superficial similarities of sound ... We may note that 
the name Hevajra, that of the second major deity of the 
Yoginītantras, appears to have a similar origin, having 
been conjured up from the Mantra HE VAJRA PAŚYA “O 
Vajra[-being], behold!” that is uttered when the blindfold 
is removed from the candidate’s eyes in the presence of the 
Maṇḍala ( Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha , section 230).’late 12th century, the flight of the Indian Buddhist 
masters fuelled a sudden growth and refinement 
of Buddhism in Nepal and Tibet, while their mo-
nastic vehicle entered the courts of the kings and 
emperors defending their domains in Maritime 
Asia. Indian Buddhist strategists had apparently 
long aspired to overlay a Heruka maṇḍala on Śaiva 
holy sites3 to implement forms of ‘state protection 
Buddhism’ that would rival the hold of Śaivism over 
the courts of the subcontinent. This aspiration was 
to materialize only outside India. 
This chapter brings together the patches of evi-
dence scattered over the wide and varied geography 
of the southern seas to trace this royal rebirth of the 
Herukas in Maritime Asia. In so doing, it attempts 
to carry the baton forward for the final seaward 
leg of the history of fierce Buddhist deities that 
Rob Linrothe (1999) brilliantly traced across the 
subcontinent. He concluded with these notable 
3. The Hevajratantra  wa s widely disseminated and is dated 
to the late 8th century by Snellgrove (1959: vol. I: 14), to the 
late 9th century by Samuel (2008: 285), and to the 9th–10th 
centuries by Davidson (2005: 51). See below the list of the 
target holy sites in Hevajratantra  I.vii 13–16. Griffiths (2014) 
recently found textual evidence for the presence of this text 
in Sumatra. In his close reading of mantras inscribed on 
gold foils found at Padang Lawas, he acknowledges a tip 
from Harunaga Isaacson about the insertion of the Sanskrit 
conjunction tadanu (‘after that’, Monier-Williams 1899: 
434), which is not part of the mantra. Isaacson thought the 
insertion ‘... proves unequivocally that the mantra is being 
taken directly from this chapter of the [Hevajra-] Tantra, 
thus furnishing strong evidence that the text itself was 
transmitted and read in Padang Lawas’ ( ibid.: 230). This 
appears likely from the fact that Atiśa and Dharmakīrti, 
both experts in this text, studied together for twelve years 
in Sumatra in the early 11th century; see below.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   126 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 131] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia127
remarks on the eight-headed, sixteen-armed 
Heruka ‘Hevajra’:
If there was a Hevajra cult, it seems to have 
thrived in Southeast Asia. Hevajra imagery 
may have come overland to Thailand from 
eastern India, direct from Bengal via Burma. 
The transmission of Hevajra teachings was 
probably reinforced through contacts along 
the maritime routes from island Southeast 
Asia and eastern India. Whatever the exact 
route, it clearly had considerable influence 
in the highest levels of society. Seemingly re -
moved from his yogic and monastic origins, 
Hevajra was utilized in the royal cult, not as 
in the Ming court, to improve relations with 
Tibet, but as part of an attempt at local legit -
imization ... It appears that despite the earlier 
origin of the texts and ideas behind the He- 
vajra imagery, they were not influential enough 
to generate a lasting impact until the 11th or 
12th century. By that time, however, the ideas 
and images quickly flowed in eastern, southern and northern directions. Islam alone proved an impenetrable barrier. ( ibid.: 274)
I will propose that we can discern a long-term ec-
lectic strategy devised by Khmer Buddhists to bring 
the established state Śaivism under a dominant 
parasol of Esoteric Buddhism—a model defined 
in the Tantras devoted to the Herukas Hevajra 
and Cakrasaṃvara who were to figure in Khmer 
iconography. For the people, the king’s Buddhist 
drive was underpinned with a tantric Buddhist 
triad headed by Bhaiṣajyaguru, master of remedies, 
who presided over a remarkable and unprecedented 
empire-wide network of 102 hospitals that were 
open to all.4 This strategy succeeded in turning the 
4. The Buddha presiding over the triad erected in the 
hospitals was only recently identified as the Khmer tantric 
Bhaiṣajyaguru by Hiram Woodward in 2009 at a Banteay 
Chhmar conference in Sisophon, Cambodia. Woodward 
had long sought a Khmer triad of icons that would have 
been inserted into pedestals pierced with three tenon holes 
in numerous ancient sites of Khorat hospitals, but only 
solved the mystery when he saw at a New York dealer’s a 
bronze Buddha and two Bodhisattvas in Bayon-style attire 
seated on thrones welded together (Woodward 2011: 497). 
The crowned Buddha, sitting with the ritual vajra  and 
ghaṇṭā  bell crossed at his chest and flanked by bodhisattvas state definitively to Buddhism and related Bud-
dhist politico-religious strategies, as Acri observes, 
thrived in their localized adaptations in Java and 
Sumatra until the 15 th century.5 Such royal Heruka 
cults in the states of the southern seas have been 
identified for a century, but their importance to 
rulers and the ways they were deployed is only now 
emerging more clearly. Few texts have survived in 
the tropics so the historical data is much thinner 
than in China, Korea, and Japan,6 but some recent 
icon recoveries and close studies of temple ruins 
have, for example, brought some clarity to a 12 th 
century dispute between the Khmer empire and 
neighbouring Campā, as well as to inter-state con-
frontations some decades later on the islands of 
Java and Sumatra. They furnish indications that 
the Buddhists in the south attempted to replicate 
the system of Vidyāpīṭha Śaivism, where Śaiva 
masters drew authority and supernatural powers 
to support kings from potent, networked holy pil-
grimage sites. This is sketched as an aspiration-
al strategy in two Y oginītantras, where Buddhist 
Bhairavas or Herukas are superimposed on the 
holding cylinders, had previously been identified as the 
supreme sixth Esoteric Buddha Vajradhara in an uncon -
ventional version of the crossed-arms vajrahuṃkāra-mudrā . 
The hospitals, according to their inscribed dedication stelas 
(Sharrock and Jacques 2017: 231) were supplied three times a 
year with precise amounts of herbs, camphor, resins, honey 
and with small amounts of precious minerals from the 
royal storehouse in the capital. In the Bayon state temple, 
in face-tower sanctuary BY21 on the upper level beside the 
central sanctuary, the full medical triad is presented thus: 
‘Lord Master of Healing, the [King of] Lapis Lazuli Radi -
ance; Lord Sunlight [or Solar Radiance]; Lord Moonlight 
(Lunar Radiance)’ (Maxwell 2007: 124).
5. Acri 20
16: 8.
6. Here ar
e Chinese and Japanese examples of the kinds 
of records that may have been lost in the disintegration 
of mediaeval temple libraries in topical zones: ‘In 767, 
Amoghavajra initiated the ordination of 37 monks for 
repeated performances of rituals on Mount Wutai to “es -
tablish the state as a field of merit” (T 2120.52 835 b17-c9). 
Significantly, this number refers to the 37 central deities 
of the vajradhātumaṇ ḍala’ (Lehnert 2012: 263). Conlan 
(2011: 107–114) describes how d uring the 1330 s civil war 
in Japan the southern court deployed monks and relics to 
holy mountain sites considered as defining the Shingon 
Diamond and Womb maṇḍalas over the landscape of an 
ensuing battle. They attributed the outcome to the efficacy 
of the monk’s prayer rituals. 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   127 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 132] ---
Peter Sharrock128
Śaiva Vidyāpīṭhas in maṇḍalic semi-circles de -
scending from Mount Kailāsa (Fig. 4.3 ) in order to 
create supramundane fields of merit over Buddhist 
royal domains. The compilers of the Hevajratantra7 
and the Saṃvarodayatantra  include the maritime 
polity Suvarṇadvīpa (probably Sumatra) in the 
outer maṇḍalic circle (see below).
the hevajra-system and its royal 
dimension in maritime asia
J.J. Boeles (1966 : 26) analysed two Khmer Y oginī 
bronzes from Thailand and, noting Grünwedel’s 
(1900 : 63) work on Kublai Khan’s Hevajra abhiṣeka, 
joined earlier scholars who pointed to signs of a 
significant royal role for the Hevajratantra beyond 
the subcontinent:
The cult of Hevajra, though its most important 
rites were secret, was by no means confined to 
an obscure sect. It must at one time have been 
of great importance throughout the Far East. 
In 1261 the great Khublai Khan, the ruler of 
most of Asia and part of Europe, was conse -
crated as Hevajra by means of abhiṣeka  rites 
exactly like those expounded in the Hevajrase -
kaprakriyā  [ceremony manual; see Finot 1934].
Heruka icons played a role on both sides of a long 
dispute over Vijaya, a new Cam deep water port 
and new capital that the Cams and Khmers had 
collaborated in building so their economies would 
benefit from the burgeoning Song dynasty mari -
time trade. Cam prince Vidyānandana, who first 
led in a Khmer army to recover control of the port, 
soon broke with his patron in Angkor and pro -
claimed himself king of Campā. After defeating 
another Khmer force sent against him, he erected 
a Buddhist temple to Heruka in 1194  CE at the 
major Cam Śaiva mountain temple complex of Mỹ 
Sơn, before being eventually vanquished and forced 
into exile by a third Khmer army.8 Shortly after 
7. Tanaka’s position underlines the significance of this 
text: ‘The Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism ... is based on 
the Hevajratantra ... The Hevajratantra was one of the most 
popular tantras in late tantric Buddhism, and consequently 
many commentaries were written’ (Tanaka 2018: 224).
8. The Heruka was erected by prince Vidyānandana of 
Tumprauk-vijaya under his new regnal name of King 
Sūryavarman along with a large, dated, and unusually clear his defeat, a large (3.6  m) stone icon of Hevajra, 
according to recent research, was erected in the 
Bayon, the first Buddhist state temple in Angkor, 
capital of the Khmer empire and, according to 
recent LiDAR remote sensing archaeology,9 prob -
ably the largest city on earth outside China. The 
icon is now thought to have been erected in the 
main eastern entrance to the state temple, facing 
towards Campā. Such findings lend support to 
an earlier bold though unsubstantiated claim by 
Bautze-Picron that ‘... Hevajra is the protector of 
the State in Cambodia and perhaps also Campā 
whereas it is Mahākāla who assumes this role in the 
Yuan Empire’ (Bautze-Picron 2014 : 107 ).
Some decades later the emperor Kublai Khan of 
China10 (then planning his eventually unsuccessful 
seaborne invasion of the southern seas) and East 
Javanese King Kṛtanagara underwent Heruka con-
secrations either ahead of campaigns of conquest 
or in response to the threat of invasion. A pattern 
thus emerges in inter-state confrontations in which 
supramundane Esoteric Buddhist maṇḍalas were 
invoked to underpin imperial strategies in the 
mundane sphere. In China, a century before Kublai, 
an 11th-century chronicle entitled Comprehensive 
Mirror for Aiding Government shows how ‘funda -
mental elements of Esoteric Buddhism were incor -
porated into the most rarefied strata of the Chinese 
imperial government’ (Goble 2016 : 124 ):
His Highness set up a maṇḍala  (daochang  道
場) in the Triple Hall ( sandian  三殿 ) taking the 
historical inscription (C. 92 B), now kept in the museum 
at the site. Schweyer summarized his story thus: ‘When 
he reneged on his relationship with Jayavarman VII, king 
Sūryavarman turned to emperor Long Cán of the neigh -
bouring Đai Việt for acknowledgement of his legitimacy, 
which was granted in 1199. But the extraordinary military 
career of the Cam king was to end in disaster. Vietnamese 
records show that after Jayavarman sent yet another army 
to defeat him in 1203, Vidyānandana fled and requested 
asylum in the Đai Việt. He was rejected and disappeared 
without trace. His paternal uncle, called in the inscriptions 
Yuvaraja Oṅ Dhanapati-grama, became a governor under 
the Khmer authority from 1203 to ca 1220, when the Khmer 
army withdrew after Jayavarman’s death’ (Schweyer 2009: 
327). See also Finot 1904: 168–169, Sharrock 2006: 183–186, 
Jacques 2015: 142–144. 
9. Evans 2
016. 
10. Wille
men 1983: 16.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   128 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 133] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia129
Palace Women ( gongren  宮人 ) to act as Bud -
dhas and Bodhisattvas and the North Gate 
military elite ( beimen wushi  北門武士 ) to act 
as Vajra[pāṇis? -sattvas?] and divine kings. He 
summoned the Grand Ministers ( dachen  大
臣) to prostrate to and circumambulate them. 
(Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑒  222)
This did not amount to a restructuring of the 
Chinese state but rather to the casting of a mantle 
of Esoteric Buddhist cosmology and potent ritual 
technology over the long-established state appara -
tus. I will propose that resurgent Khmer Buddhists 
of the 11th and 12th centuries cast a similar ritual 
mantle over the temples that had established the 
Śaiva state over four centuries and that this would 
contribute to a definitive Khmer turn to Buddhism. 
The steady absorption of Śaiva and Śākta texts 
into the Esoteric Buddhist Yoginītantras com-
posed in the great Ganges valley monasteries 
under the Pāla dynasty is traced in Sanderson’s 
seminal 2009 study of ‘The Śaiva Age’. In often de-
liberately obscure language, the Buddhists taught 
not only accelerated attainment of Buddhahood 
but made ritual technologies for invoking super-
natural powers available to kings in their affairs 
of state. He detects the transfers primarily from 
Śaiva texts already embedded in Brahmanical 
court rituals:
Now, this co-existence of Buddhism and 
Śaivism under royal patronage was surely 
facilitated by the fact that the form of Bud -
dhism adopted and developed was one that 
had equipped itself […] with a repertoire of 
Tantric ceremonies that paralleled that of the 
Śaivas and indeed had modelled itself upon 
it, offering initiation by introduction before 
a Maṇḍala in which the central deity of the 
cult and its retinue of divine emanations […] 
through the use of Mantras, Mudrās, visuali -
zation, and fire-sacrifice ( homaḥ ); and this was 
presented not only as a new and more powerful 
means of attaining Buddha-hood but also, as 
in the Śaiva case, as enabling the production 
of supernatural effects ( siddhiḥ ) such as the 
averting of danger ( śāntiḥ ), the harming of en -
emies ( abhicāraḥ ), and the control of the rain 
(varṣāpaṇam  and ativṛṣṭidhāraṇam )… The 
latter is particularly important from the point of view of Buddhism’s relations with its royal 
patrons, since such rituals enabled it to match 
the Śaivas by promising kings more tangible 
benefits than the mere accumulation of merit 
through the support of the Buddha, his teach -
ing, and the Saṅgha. (Sanderson 2009: 124)
The supernatural powers embedded in maṇḍalas 
were deployed for leveraging intra-state legitimi-
zation after regime change as well as inter-state 
confrontations. The supramundane hierarchy cap-
tured in the maṇḍala proffered weaponized defence 
mechanisms for inter-state struggles, which found 
a more responsive audience outside the subcon -
tinent and notably in the conflicts between the 
neighbouring Khmer and Cam domains in the 
12th century, between China and Java in the 13 th 
century, as well as between Java and Śrīvijaya in 
the 13th and 14 th centuries. Although these royal 
invocations of supernatural power were based on 
metaphysics rather than physics, a modern reader 
may find some value in comparing them with the 
20th century cold war nuclear standoff between the 
US and the Soviet Union. Bade (2016 : 155) glosses 
the Kublai-Kṛtanagara confrontation as follows:
As a technique for obtaining power and con -
trol over the world, Tantric Buddhism—and 
especially its rituals—came to occupy the same 
place in 13th and 14th century Asian societies 
that science and technology occupies in our 
own time. The advocates of scientific method, 
like the advocates of Tantric Buddhism, have 
claimed that this method alone leads to knowl -
edge and that knowledge is power.
The power of new knowledge is touched on in the 
fifth opening line in the Chinese version of the He-  
vajratantra : ‘There is great power in this learning 
by which one is capable of various performances, 
viz. subjugating, petrifying, or driving away the 
army of others’ .11 Though a far cry from what is 
known of early Buddhism and Śākyamuni’s 5th 
century BCE call in Magadha for withdrawal from 
normal family life into a saṅgha focused on med-
itation and study, both contexts shared a claim to 
breakthrough mechanisms to attain a new form of 
knowledge. The later Esoteric Buddhist state pro-
11. Willemen 1983: 35.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   129 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 134] ---
Peter Sharrock130
tection mechanisms may also seem to run counter 
to the spirit of emperor Aśoka’s standing down his 
army after the brutal 261  BCE battle for Kaliṅga, 
its earth ploughed with salt, and then governing 
the Mauryan state through personalized Buddhist 
edicts administered by civilian envoys.12 But Aśoka’s 
remarkable accomplishment barely survived his 
reign and the saṅgha leaders were soon faced with 
the return of conquering Buddhist kṣatriyas.
The early propagation of the new maṇḍala 
knowledge beyond the subcontinent begins to 
be recorded in the 7 th century in the journeys 
of learned and enterprising monks over the land 
Silk Routes. It expands in the 8th century over 
the maritime routes, from the monasteries and 
courts of south India and Sri Lanka, to Java, Śrīvi-
jaya and then China (with disciples following on 
to Korea and Japan). The texts of the Y ogatantras 
and the Womb-realm and Vajra-realm maṇḍalas 
they defined would soon be impacting the design 
of impressive ceremonial centres being built by a 
series of expanding rice empires in the south,13 and 
were captured in Chinese translations, conserved in 
state archives, and reflected in state rituals. 
Sanderson (2009 : 125) points out that the 
‘monarch is not mentioned in the treatments of 
initiation given in the Mahāvairocanābhisambo -
dhi [MVS] and Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha 
[STTS], the two great Tantras that were translated 
12. See Thapar 1961: 62. Kenneth Hall (1996: 101, n. 10) 
draws a parallel between the reign of Aśoka and that of 
East Javanese King Hayam Wuruk (r. 1350–1389 CE): ‘Asoka, 
who completed the Mauryan conquest of northern India in 
what Indian texts describe to have been extremely brutal 
asuryavijaya , “demonic victories”. The highlight of his ag -
gressive actions was the dismemberment of Kalinga, which 
concluded with Asoka’s troops salting over that region’s 
soil. Thereafter Asoka became devoted to religion as the 
basis of his consolidation as the chakravartin , “universal 
monarch”. As Asoka asserts in his Thirteenth Rock Edict, 
he was now apologetic for his past actions of brutality, and 
now would pursue dharmavijaya , “righteous victory/moral 
victory”, and employed dharma ministers to integrate his 
newly conquered realm.’
13. See in the second volume of this edited collection 
Hudaya Kandahjaya’s analysis of how the architects of 
Borobudur, when elaborating geometrical and arithmetical 
computations for the construction of the monument, were 
inspired by key elements within the Vajradhātu maṇḍala 
and the Garbhadhātu maṇḍala . into Chinese in the early eighth century to form 
the basis of the Way of Mantras there and in the 
Japanese Shingon and Tendai sects. ’ Y et Amogha- 
vajra (Ch. Bukong), the renowned translator monk 
from Sogdiana, who perhaps met his preceptor Va-
jrabodhi (Ch. Jin’gangzhi) at a young age in Java,14 
became deeply involved in imperial state protection 
through Esoteric ritual.15 Amoghavajra’s official 
biography shows him as being called on to resolve 
crises of the Tang emperors—bringing rain to end 
droughts, repelling a Tibetan army at the border, 
helping to restore the Tang after the An Lushan 
rebellion, and then consecrating emperor Suzong 
as cakravartin16 and holding extended faith prop -
agation ceremonies for thousands of courtiers and 
army officers.17 Charles Orzech (1998 : 138) reaches 
the conclusion that the Buddhists’ ‘teachings were 
shaped both by their particular religious ideologies 
and by imperial needs. Chinese Esoteric Buddhism 
in the eighth century was driven by political utility. ’ 
14. Abe 1999: 222–223; Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 30.
15. See Yur
y Khokhlov’s chapter in this volume on how 
Amoghavajra’s southern seas experience left a deep imprint 
on Tang Buddhism that then later flowed through the Hexi 
corridor and Dunhuang into Tibetan Buddhism.
16. Lehne
rt 2012: 262.
17. ‘In the t
hird year of Ta-li [768], the master [Amogha -
vajra] held a ceremony at the [Ta-]hsing-shan monastery. 
He was given [by the emperor] 12 quilts of embroidered 
brocade and 32 embroidered gauze banners, the value of 
which was 10 million cash. In addition, he was given enough 
provisions to permit the crowd to remain at the ceremony 
for 14 days. The eunuch attendants, the ministers, and all 
the commanders of the imperial army were ordered by the 
emperor to receive abhi ṣeka at th e ceremony. Altogether 
more than 5,000 monks and laymen attended’ (Orlando 
1981: 144). See also Orzech’s account of the Esoteric turn 
of the mid-Tang court in the eighth century in Orzech 
1998: 135–146, and Sundberg and Giebel 2011. Hiram Wood -
ward (2004: 341) adds the nuance that ‘it is likely that the 
Mantrayāna—specifically the texts quoted in the Sang 
Hyang Kamahāyānan Mantranaya —was known in Java in 
792, primarily through connections with the Abhayagiri 
Monastery. The reason is less because of the wording of the 
Ratubaka inscription than because of the relationship of 
these texts to the thinking of Amoghavajra. In other words, 
following this line of analysis, it was not Amoghavajra’s pas -
sages through Southeast Asia that tie Javanese to Chinese 
traditions, but the connections of both Amoghavajra, who 
stayed there [in Sri Lanka] in the 740s, and central Javanese 
Buddhists to the Abhayagiri.’ 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   130 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 135] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia131
With their entry at court level in Maritime Asia, 
the Buddhists’ teachings in cosmology, soteriology 
and ritual technology found expression in large 
royal ceremonial centres, the remnants of which 
form the bulk of the material record that has come 
down to us. In addition, the diaries of travelling 
Indian, Chinese, and Korean monks open rare, il-
luminating windows into how Buddhist courts and 
communities along the sea lanes were linked into 
an interactive network. 
By the 10 th century, images took a tantric turn 
to represent the fierce protagonist deities of the 
later Esoteric Buddhist Y oginītantras, which had 
developed in Ganges Valley monasteries and in 
Bengal under the Pāla dynasty. By the time Sena 
kings replaced the Pālas in 1070  CE, resplendent 
Heruka deities dancing on māra  demons had been 
erected in monasteries in southern Bengal, Nālandā, 
Ratnagiri (Odisha), and Sarnath. No known in -
scription however links these icons to royal pa -
tronage. The long infusion of tantric techniques 
into Buddhist scriptures was manifested in saṃsāra 
terms as fierce-eyed deities with fangs, skull chap-
lets, flourishing vajra s and grasping khaṭvāṅga skull 
staffs, like those at Śubhapur (Comilla) and the 
funerary stūpa  at Ratnagiri (Odisha).18 Sanderson 
sees the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara 
as marking the beginning of the full appropriation 
of Vidyāpīṭha Śaivism into the Y oginītantras.19 
18. See Linrothe 1999, figs. 180, 188. ‘The saṃsāra  is He ru-
ka’s phenomenal aspect, and he is the Lord, the saviour of 
the world […]. His eyes are red with compassion; his body 
is black to indicate friendliness; his four legs symbolize 
the four means of conversion, […] his eight face the eight 
releases and his sixteen arms the sixteen voids. The Five 
Buddhas are represented by the symbolic adornments, and 
he is wrathful for the subduing of the evil-disposed’. He -
vajratantra  10–12 (Snellgrove 1959: 117).
19. The orig
in myth of the Vidyāpīṭha pilgrimage sites 
around India holds that Śiva took the body of his wife, 
the goddess Satī Dākṣāyaṇī, who entered a great sacrifice 
of the gods to which she and Śiva were not invited and 
committed suicide. Śiva entered and took her body on his 
shoulders and began a dance of rage that threatened to 
engulf the cosmos. So the gods caused Satī’s body to dis -
integrate and the pīṭha s marked the spots where pieces of 
the body fell to earth (see the entry ‘pīṭhā’, Encyclopaedia 
Britannica , https://www.britannica.com/technology/pitha, 
last accessed 17 February 2020).First, it introduces or brings to the fore the 
cult of the deity Heruka with an iconogra -
phy inspired by that of the Bhairavas of the 
Vidyāpīṭha with their accoutrements and at -
tributes of the cremation-ground dwelling 
Kāpālika Śaiva ascetic. According to the visu -
alization given by Ānandagarbha he has four 
faces and eight arms, emerging as the trans -
formation of a dark blue flaming Vajra, itself 
a transformation of a dark blue syllable HRĪḤ. 
The central face is fierce ( raudram ), those to its 
right and left expressive of delusion and erotic 
passion, and that behind open-mouthed to de -
vour. In his two uppermost hands he holds the 
freshly flayed skin of Bhairava over his back, in 
the two below a bow and arrows, in the third 
right in descent he shakes a blazing three-
pronged Vajra, and in the fourth a skull-bowl 
filled with human blood ( mahāraktam ). In the 
third left in descent he brandishes the Kāpā -
lika’s skull-staff ( khaṭvāṅgaḥ ), topped with a 
three-pronged Vajra and adorned with bells, 
and in the fourth a skull-bowl filled with hu -
man flesh ( mahāmāṃsam ) (Sanderson 2009: 
148).
We will see below that an icon close to the 
Ānandagarbha model appeared, perhaps in the 13 th 
century, on the island of Sumatra in the southern 
seas. In 1935  Austrian archaeologist F.M. Schnitger, 
working in North Sumatra, followed up a report on 
a 118 cm high relief identified as a Heruka by San-
skritist F.D.K. Bosch (1930 ), who found it broken 
into fifteen pieces in the sanctuary of Bahal temple 
II at Padang Lawas (Fig. 4.1 ):20 
This god, identified by Dr Bosch as Heruka, 
bears an Akṣobhya and five skulls in his flam -
ing hair. The uplifted right-hand brandishes 
a wajra , the left hand holds the half of a skull 
in front of the breast and also clasps a staff 
trimmed with ribbons. Around the throat is a 
double necklace, across the breast a chain and 
on the shoulders hangs a long cord with about 
20. See Natasha Reichle’s account of the discovery of 
the shattered icon photographed by Bosch, followed up 
by Schnitger in 1935, who found some further damaged 
fragments in the Biaro Bahal site museum, which were 
reported lost without trace by archaeologist Rumbi Mulia 
in 1976 (Reichle 2007: 133–137).
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   131 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 136] ---
Peter Sharrock132
six heads […]. The image of Bahal strongly 
resembles the one in the Comilla in Bengal 
which now stands in the museum of Dacca. 
The latter, however, does not stand on a corpse 
but on a lotus cushion. On the upawita hang 
far more heads, and there are also other differ -
ences. (Schnitger 1937: 26)that any initiate in the practice of this Tantra 
[Guhyasamāja] is not only familiar with the 
Śaiva scriptures but is able to enact their rituals 
by assuming the role of a Śaiva Guru […]. For 
it tells the adept of this tradition that in order 
to acquire the female consort required for his post-initiatory observance he should enter the 
home of a family of untouchables who are ob-
servant devotees of Śiva, reveal to them one of 
the Saiddhāntika scriptures […], give them 
Maṇḍala initiation [following this scripture], 
and then return to them the dakṣiṇā [payment 
for sacrifice] that they will give him, taking a girl from them in its place. (Sanderson 2009: 144)
khmer empire
The Y ogatantras reached the Khmer domains in 
the 10th century when the liberal King Rājendra-
varman II returned the capital to Y aśodharapura 
(Angkor) from Koh Ker. This Śaiva monarch per -
mitted a Buddhist revival through his polymath 
minister-general-architect Kavīndrārimatha-
na, who in c. 953  CE built the Bat Cuṃ shrine at 
the heart of the new city on the eastern edge of 
Angkor and dedicated it to the Buddha, Vajrapāṇi, 
and Divyadevī (Prajñāpāramitā). Thereafter Rā-
jendravarman’s son and successor, Buddhist King 
Jayavarman V , financed a string of āśrama s for the 
study of the root Y ogatantra STTS and Śākyamitra’s 
learned 9 th century ṭīkā (comment ary). Jayavar -
man’s ācārya  Kīrtipaṇḍita had them brought to 
Angkor after ‘having searched in a foreign king -
d o m’.21 Jayavarman’s Takeo state temple however 
was dedicated to Śiva, in line with the Brahmanical 
tradition from the founding of the state in 802  CE. 
Religious tolerance and eclecticism seem to have 
21. See Tadeusz Skorupski’s translation of the Sanskrit 
insc
ription K. 111 of Wat Sithor of 980 CE, with references 
to the STTS and Śākyamitra’s ṭīkā, in Sha
rrock 2012: 205. 
The Khmer Buddhists had contact with the early Indian 
Esoteric ācārya  Puṇyodaya in the 7th century but ceremo -
nies for erecting Buddhist icons disappeared abruptly from 
the material record and the community was presumably 
suppressed. Yijing reported on his travels that he heard that 
Buddhism had entered the Khmer territory after Hindu -
ism and had flourished alongside it until the monks were 
expelled or killed by ‘a wicked king’; see Takakusu 1896: 
12. Nancy Dowling (2000: 129) concluded that this king 
was Jayavarman I (r. 657–681).
Fig. 4.1: 1930 Oudheidkundige Dienst 10591. 
Photograph of shattered high relief identified by 
Bosch as Heruka from Biaro Bahal II, Padang Lawas, 
North Sumatra, 118 cm. (Photo courtesy of Leiden 
University Library)
The fierce emanations of the supreme Buddhas 
sharing features with tantric Śaiva-Śākta deities sig -
nalled the incorporation into the monastic setting 
of a range of intense, secret rituals, which included 
antinomian actions, taboo substances, and sexual 
yoga. Sanderson claims the first monks who spe -
cialized in the new rituals had already acquired 
expertise and practice as Śaiva initiands:
[T]he Guhyasiddhi of Padmavajra, written in 
all probability in the eighth century, assumes 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   132 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 137] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia133
mostly come easily to the Khmers (see Sanderson 
2003–2004 : 233 , 435 ).
Striking among the icons of this time are 
supreme Buddhas enthroned on the coils of giant, 
multi-headed serpents or Nāgas (the Khmer Vairo-
cana?). Beside him on a series of four-sided caitya s 
is a ferocious Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya22 and a 
five-headed, ten-armed Prajñāpāramitā. They were 
found in a traditionally Buddhist area northwest 
of Angkor at Kbal Sre Y eay Yin and are now in the 
National Museum of Cambodia in Phnom Penh 
(NMCPP) and in the Musée Guimet in Paris. I have 
suggested (Sharrock 2009 : 131) that this Vajrapāṇi 
reflects the widely diffused STTS narrative of the 
fierce Bodhisattva’s subjugation of the recalcitrant 
Maheśvara, who refused to enter the Buddhist 
22. Lobo (1997: 73) saw this figure as a very early icon of 
Heva
jra. I resisted in favour of seeing the five Vajradhātu 
Jinas seated in Trailokyavijaya’s mukuṭa  as reflecting the 
STTS subjugation of Śiva and Vairocana’s warning to the 
still resistant god that ‘Vajrapā ṇi is the ov
erlord of all the 
Tathāgatas’ (Sharrock 2006: 24).
For George Cœdès (1923: 43), the name Vajrin or 
Vajrapāṇi subsumed in Khmer epigraphy the later names 
Vajradhara and Vajrasattva: ‘Mais comme ces deux noms 
ne se rencontrent pas dans l’épigraphie cambodgienne et 
que nous avons vu d’autre part Vajrapāṇi invoqué au début 
des inscriptions de Bàt Čuṃ et vénéré dans un des trois 
sanctuaires, j’ai cru pouvoir réunir toutes ce statuettes sous 
la domination unique de Vajrapāṇi, dont Vajradhara et 
Vajrasattva ne sont d’ailleurs que des succédanés.’
Woodward (2015: 244) finds that the pose, the fierce 
krodha  facial features, and the attributes suggest the 
Trailokyavijaya manifestation of Vajrapā ṇi. He mov es to 
a similar triadic identification to Cœdès when he perceives 
an intriguing local epigraphic link in noting that the fierce 
figure can be seen as upholding the five seated Jinas, in the 
way Vajrasattva is called ‘the upholder of all the Buddhas’ 
(ādhāraḥ sarvavuddhānāṃ ) in the later Sāb Bak inscription 
(K. 1158 of 1060 CE). He concludes that the krodha  is there -
fore best identified as Vajrasattva/Vajradhara/Vajrin—all 
Vajrapā ṇi names used in the Guhyasamājatantra  that i s 
referred to in Sāb Bak, where Vajradhara (‘ vajra  holder’) is 
an alternative name for Vajrasattva ( ibid.: 246). This may 
gain support from Tanaka’s recent work on the maṇḍala . 
The krodha ’s attributes are close to those of the five Buddhas 
of the Guhyasamājatantra , who are, according to Tanaka 
(2018: 182), ‘... three-headed and six-armed, and they hold 
a vajra, a wheel, a jewel, a lotus, a sword, and a bell in their 
six hands. Among these attributes, the first five are the 
symbols of the five Buddhas while the bell is regarded as 
the symbol of Vajrasattva, the sixth Buddha.’maṇḍala, provoking a confrontation in Vairoca-
na’s celestial court between Śiva in Bhairava form 
and Vajrapāṇi as Trailokyavijaya.23 Before the battle, 
won with Vajrapāṇi’s vajra , Vairocana intervened 
with the warning ‘Vajrapā ṇi is the o
verlord of all 
the Tathāgatas’ , which seems to fit the fanged figure 
in the Kbal Sre Y eay Yin caitya  with the Vajradhātu 
pentad of Jinas seated in his crown and mukuṭa  of 
ascetic hair:
His eyebrows tremble with rage, with a frown-
ing face and protruding fangs; he has a great 
krodha appearance. He holds the vajra, aṅkuśa-
hook, sharp sword, a pāśa-noose and other 
āyudha. (Dānapāla’s Chinese translation of 
STTS, T 18 882.370b, Linrothe 1999: 183)
After a seemingly vigorous Buddhist resurgence 
under Jayavarman V (r. 968–1001), King Sūryavar -
man I fought his way to the throne and re-estab-
lished the orthodox Khmer Śaiva tradition in a 
long reign that lasted through the first half of the 
11th century. The Buddhist revival was treated with 
respect. 
phimai
The closing decades of the 11 th century saw reli-
gious and political regime change in the Khmer 
domains. The Esoteric Buddhist Mahīdharapura 
dynasty seized power, guided by the Śaiva strat -
egist and rājaguru  Śrī Divākarapaṇḍita (Fig. 4.2 ), 
who would crown three kings (two Buddhist, one 
Vaiṣṇava). This religious pivot brought a northern 
vassal ruler to the throne as King Jayavarman VI 
in 1080  CE.24 Within a century the dynasty would 
make Angkor one of the largest cities outside China. 
23. Davidson sees the Śiva subjugation myth as defen-
sive against the rising power of the Trimūrti: ‘Buddhist 
monasteries at this period had become enormous landed 
institutions that controlled great economic resources but 
had a tenuous relationship to the wider society, somewhat 
like the medieval Christian monasteries and modern uni-
versities ... Thus, at the socio-historical level, we should 
understand the Maheśvara myth in the Tattvasaṃgraha as 
a straight-forward defensive technique of the Buddhists to 
establish superiority of their gods over Maheśvara, Brahmā, 
Viṣṇu, etc., in an attempt to retrieve some of their lost posi-
tion in unsophisticated circles in India, whether at Devīkoṭa, 
Vārāṇasī, Patna or wherever’ (Davidson 1991: 215).
24. See Bri
ggs 1999 [1951]: 188. 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   133 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 138] ---
Peter Sharrock134
In Phimai, Divākarapaṇḍita must have been 
steeped in both Vidyāpīṭha Śaivism and the de -
fensive Y oginītantra strategies developed in the 
monasteries of 10th and 11 th century Pāla-Sena 
Bengal and Bihar and imported into the Buddhist 
revival in Tibet. Davidson (2005 : 41–41) sees this in 
Tibet as a Buddhist counterstrategy that consisted 
in overlaying the Cakrasaṃvara maṇḍala on the established 108 Śaiva Vidyāpīṭha holy sites in India. 
He published a hand-drawn map entitled ‘Sites of 
Indian Buddhist Tantric Activity 10 th–11 th centu-
ries’ in which the Heruka emitted by the supreme 
Buddha Vajrasattva/Vajradhara held the centre of 
the maṇḍala on Mount Kailāśa above three con -
centric and roughly semi-circular rings of pīṭhas 
with eight Bhairavas each (Fig. 4.3 ):
Adapted from a story articulated in such  
yoga-tantra works as the Sarvatathāgata- 
tattvasaṁgraha, Cakrasaṃvara proponents 
maintained that the eternal Buddha Vajradhara 
emanated a form, Heruka, to control Ma-
heśvara (Śiva) and his twenty-four Bhairavas, 
along with their consorts. Maheśvara was even-
tually humiliated and destroyed, and Heruka 
took his place on top of Mount Sumeru, with the 24 Bhairavas controlling the 24 pilgrimage 
sites of India. (ibid.: 41)
This Buddhist aspirational model for a new sacred 
geography for absorbing and eventually dominat-
ing the subcontinent’s long-implanted Śaiva holy 
pilgrimage sites was propagated through the wide-
ly-distributed Hevajratantra  itself, which lists the 24  
targeted sites in the maṇḍala (I.vii 13 –16):
The sites with asterisk are also named in the 
Saṁvarodayatantra  (Tsuda 1974 : 252). Interestingly, 
the pīṭhas targeted by the Tantric masters in both of 
these texts include, in the outer ring, Suvarṇadvīpa 
(‘Golden Isle’ , usually taken to intend Sumatra or 
the adjacent Thai/Malay Peninsula).
Because of its interest in sacred geography, 
some Indian masters of the Cakrasaṃvara 
were well aware that sacred sites existed outside 
India as well as inside it, and the list includes 
Suvarṇadvīpa, a medieval kingdom various -
ly located in Burma [probably Suvarṇabhūmi, 
‘land of gold’] or Indonesia. (Davidson 2005: 41)Fig. 4.2: Presumed portrait of rāja-hotā Śrī 
Divākarapaṇḍita, architect of the Mahīdharapura 
dynasty, being carried by Śaiva ascetics in the military 
parade of Sūryavarman II, the third king he crowned, 
on the southern bas-relief of Angkor Wat. This was the 
only Khmer guru in history to be given the title Dhuli 
Jeng (‘dust of the feet’ [of the god]), normally reserved 
for kings. (Photo by author)
Table 4.1
pīṭhas upapīṭha s kṣetras upakṣetras chandoha supacchandoha s melāpaka s
Uḍḍiyāna* Mālava* Munmuni Kulatā* Harikela Kaliṅga Pretapuri*
Jālandhara* Sindhu* Kāruṇyapāṭaka Arbuda* Lampāka Suvarṇadvīpa* Gṛhadevatā*
Paurṇagiri* Nagara Devīkoṭa* Godāvarī* Kāñcika* Kokaṇa
Kāmarūpa* Karmārapāṭaka Himādri Saurāṣṭra*
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   134 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 139] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia135
Fig. 4.3: Sites of Indian Buddhist tantric activity 10th–11th centuries: Davidson 2005: 39.  
(Map courtesy of Ronald Davidson and Columbia University Press)2525
25 Davidson (2005: 41) elaborates on the map as follows: ‘While the exact number of deities in individual maṇḍala s 
diffe
red, each featured Cakrasaṃvara (as Heruka) in the center and three concentric rings of eight Bhairavas per ring 
progressing out from the center, representing the maṇḍala s of mind, speech and body.’ 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   135 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 140] ---
Peter Sharrock136
In the burgeoning Khmer empire of the late 11th 
century, Divākarapaṇḍita was the leading reli -
gious advisor (rājaguru ) to a B uddhist usurper, 
who became King Jayavarman VI, the founder of 
the Mahīdharapura dynasty that would, within 
a century, take Angkor to its apogee.26 It seems 
possible that he was instrumental in the selection 
of such a Heruka-maṇḍala concept of alignment 
with established major religious centres as a means 
of asserting the new dynasty’s support for the 
long-embedded Śaiva holy sites of the kingdom, 
as well as legitimizing a new (predominantly Es -
oteric Buddhist) dynasty from a powerbase in the 
northwest of the empire. The Esoteric Buddhist Sāb 
Bak inscription (K. 1158  of 1060  CE), mentioned in 
footnote 22 above, does mention Buddha images 
being erected in a tīrtha .
In the year 988, on the seventh day of the bright 
fortnight of the month of Tapasya, this learned 
Vraḥ Dhanus is the one who has installed 
the Sugata and other images in Tenpāsnaga, 
the fortunate and excellent pilgrimage place 
(tīrtha ).2727
No other epigraphic account survives of such an 
extension of the mantle or seal of a new dynasty 
across the realm of Jayavarman VI, but Sanderson 
records, on the basis of inscription K. 194  (A9–B17 ), 
how the wealth bestowed on Divākarapaṇḍita for 
the coronation of Sūryavarman II was personally 
borne by the Guru to key religious sites in the form 
of gifts to Śiva from the new (Vaiṣṇava) king:
26 ‘Jayavarman seems to have been an ambitious prince 
and his ambition was apparently fired by a young brahman 
named Divākara whom he met early in his career. Taking 
advantage of the unsettled state of affairs, Jayavarman 
seems to have raised the standard of revolt and proclaimed 
himself king in the north…. The first appearance of Jayavar -
man VI as king is found in an inscription at the temple of 
Nom Van, near the present Korat, which Cœdès dated in 
1082. This inscription, in Sanskrit and Khmer […] was a 
royal order of Jayavarman, who is called king, addressed to 
many high civil and religious dignitaries, directing them to 
supervise the monasteries ( devāśrama ) at Ratnapura (Nom 
Van) […]. Some of these notables will be mentioned in later 
inscriptions; so it appears Jayavarman had strong support 
from the beginning of his reign’ (Briggs 1999 [1951]: 178).
27 Verse 13 of an unpublished 2012 translation by Tadeusz 
Skorupski prepared for a SOAS research group.Divākarapaṇḍita, after serving in lesser capac -
ities under Udayādityavarman II (r. 1050–1066) 
and Harṣavarman III (r. 1066–1080), is said to 
have followed this practice as Vraḥ Guru under 
Jayavarman VI (r. 1080–1107), Dharaṇīndra -
varman I (r. 1107–1112) and Sūryavarman II (r. 
1113–c. 1150). We are told that after he had per -
formed the royal consecration of Sūryavarman 
II, given him Śaiva initiation, taught him the 
Śaiva scriptures and other branches of learn -
ing, and been invited to perform the Koṭiho -
ma and other annual brahmanical sacrifices for him, he was given golden palanquins and many other valuables so that he could visit 
various sacred sites around the kingdom and 
give these to the deities installed there, each 
engraved with a verse composed by the king 
himself to the effect that it was a gift to Śiva 
made by his revered Guru. The sites chosen for 
this purpose were five, of which the first three 
are clearly the most important: Bhadreśvara 
[Wat Phu], Śikharīśvara (Preah Vihear), and 
Śivapura Danden (Phnom Sandak). At each 
of these he had a water-reservoir excavated, 
founded a hermitage, gave it slaves and villages 
and made an endowment to provide for wor -
ship. (Sanderson 2003–2004: 420)
The iconography of Phimai is truly noteworthy. 
The icon in the central sanctuary is lost and, ac -
cording to Woodward (2003: 149), was ‘probably a 
Nāga-protected Buddha’ . After paying tribute to the 
scale and artistic power of the central lintels carved 
in high relief, evidently produced by ‘the movement 
of the kingdom’s finest craftsmen to this eccentric 
location’ (ibid .), Woodward goes on to note that 
they have an innovative ‘stretched-out maṇḍala 
form’ and share an unusual and striking theme in-
volving ‘conquering’: ‘The other four interior lintels 
have Buddhist subject matter and may each involve 
conquering. The outer southern lintel is a standing 
crowned Buddha ... the northern and eastern lintels, 
both themselves stretched-out maṇḍalas, have at 
their centers forms of Vajrasattva and Saṁvara, 
respectively. ’28 
The most striking image is a Khmer Heruka on 
the eastern lintel which appears to be an unortho-
28 Conti (2014: 384) has more recently argued for seeing 
a maṇḍala  of Akṣobhya rather than Vajrasattva.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   136 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 141] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia137
dox, three- or four-headed, eight-armed martial 
representation of Cakrasaṃvara, bursting out of a 
bloodied elephant hide of illusion and trampling 
crowned māra s on the elephant’s head in an ar -
dhaparyaṅka (half-crosse d legs) dance posture 
(Fig. 4.4). The Heruka’s dance posture and his at-
tributes depart from texts that describe him, such 
as the Sādhanamālā,  and are unique to a Khmer 
iconography that is repeated in small terracotta 
tablets (Conti 2014 : 389). The elephant hide, which 
Cakrasaṃvara normally stretches out behind his 
back, but within which the deity here dances, is 
key to his identification on this relief. Snellgrove 
is one of many scholars who have pointed to the 
deity’s Śaiva parentage.29 In his 2007 translation of 
the ŚrīCakrasaṃvaranāmamahāyoginītantrarāja 
or Laghusaṃvara, David Gray (2007 : 36) trans-
lates the name Cakrasaṃvara as ‘the binding of the 
wheels’ of kāyavākcitta  (body, speech, mind). As the 
representation of a spiritual embrace of the entire 
human saṃsāra (‘wandering through phenomena’), 
this could have potential application in the polit -
ical world, and perhaps in the manner achieved 
by Guru Divākarapaṇḍita. Davidson, looking at 
the decline of Buddhism in India and its hard-
won revival in Tibet, casts the Buddhist maṇḍala 
take-over response more aggressively in line with 
Vajrapāṇi’s oft-repeated subjugation of Maheśvara 
in the STTS:
The Cakrasaṃvara system represented a new 
attempt to bring a sense of place to the tantric 
table ... Adapted from a story articulated in 
such yoga-tantra works as the Sarvatathāga -
tatattvasaṃgraha , Cakrasaṃvara proponents 
maintained that the eternal Buddha Va -
jradhara emanated a Heruka form to control 
Maheśvara and his 24 Bhairavas and consorts. 
Maheśvara was eventually humiliated and de -
29 Snellgrove (2004 [1987]: 155) sees Saṃvara as essentially 
a Buddhist remodelling of Śiva: ‘Despite the symbolic inter -
pretation in exclusively Buddhist terms, the origin of this 
divinity must surely be clear. The naked ascetic smeared 
in ashes with piled up matted hair, adorned with a lunar 
crescent, wearing skins of elephant and tiger, garlanded 
with skulls, holding trident, drum and khaṭvāṅga , all these 
attributes indicate Śiva as lord of yogins, the very one whom 
Vajrapā ṇi is presumed in another context to have reduced 
to abject submission.’stroyed and Heruka took his place on Mt Sum -
eru, with the 24 Bhairavas controlling the 24 
pilgrimage sites in India. (Davidson 2005: 41)
It appears possible that Divakārapaṇḍita and 
Jayavarman devised a plan to extend a new sacred 
Buddhist geography across the empire. If this was 
so, their strategy at first looks to have been circum-
spect and incremental. They began in Phimai, a 
traditionally Buddhist region in the north western 
wing of the empire, rather than in Brahmanical 
Angkor and perhaps offered gifts to Śiva at major 
religious centres as later took place under Sūryavar -
man II, as noted above. Presumably their caution 
reflected trepidation at the response of the Śaiva 
landowning establishment. David Snellgrove made 
this comment on the 10 th-century Khmer Buddhist 
revival:
But Buddhism was clearly at a disadvantage, 
especially within the confines of the capital 
city of Angkor ... [T]he lineages of influential 
Brahmans, often related to the leading aristo -
cratic families, formed an essential part of the 
structure of the state at least from the time of 
Jayavarman II onwards. (Snellgrove 2001: 54)
Jayavarman VI was crowned in Angkor but the 
only construction there attributable to him—in my 
view—is the walled Buddhist-Brahmanical temple 
of Banteay Samré, with unique Khmer tantric ico-
nography, built on the eastern edge of the city.30 
Angkor itself remained under the sway of Śiva in 
the grand and stately Baphuon pyramidal temple, 
set beside the palace and facing the wide royal plaza 
at the heart of Angkor. This was the work of the 
Śaiva King Sūryavarman I (r. 1005 –1050 ) and his 
sons Udayādityavarman (r. 1150 –1166  CE) and 
Harṣavarman III (r. 1166 –1180  CE). It would take 
another century before another Esoteric Buddhist 
king—Jayavarman VII—would plant Heruka in 
the centre of Angkor within the first Buddhist state 
temple. 
30 The claim that Banteay Samré is contemporaneous 
with Phimai is based on the almost identical construction 
of doorway, roofs, lintels and staircases—and towering 
central sanctuaries with elegant antefixes which give them 
the shape of giant pineapples or corncobs and were the 
precursors of the towers of Angkor Wat.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   137 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 142] ---
Peter Sharrock138
As noted earlier, religious tolerance was the 
norm in the ancient Khmer domains. It was pos -
sible for Divākarapaṇḍita, the most eminent Śaiva 
Brahmin of his time, to officiate over the coronation 
of two Buddhists and one Vaiṣṇava king, and to do 
this with the traditional 802  CE Śaiva cakravartin  
coronation ritual called devarāja. The guru lived 
long enough to crown the ardent Vaiṣṇava King 
Sūryavarman II (r. 1113 –1149 ) after he seized the 
throne from his Buddhist uncle and from Harṣavar -
man III, at the age of sixteen. Sūryavarman con-
structed the enormous, world-celebrated and per -
fectly finished Angkor Wat temple, and led military 
campaigns by land and sea into the neighbouring 
Ðai Viet in alliance with kings of Campā. His intra-
regional expeditions and his alliance with the Cams 
would set a model for regional interactions for three 
centuries. He was succeeded by his much younger 
brother Tribhuvanādityavarman, an Esoteric Bud-
dhist who built eight Buddhist shrines, according to 
inscription K. 1297 , which was recently auctioned 
in Paris and preliminarily translated by the late 
Claude Jacques, and whose translation and study is 
forthcoming by a team of scholars from the EFEO 
in Paris.31 This king left many icons of crowned 
and bejewelled Buddhas enthroned on giant Nāgas 
carved in what French historians defined as the 
‘ Angkor Wat style’ .
No dedication stela is extant for the enormous 
temple complex of Prasat Hin Phimai, presumed 
to be Jayavarman VI’s off-centre powerbase, but a 
construction on this scale could only have been fi-
nanced by the royal treasury. On the western side of 
Phimai’s central sanctuary, there is a Cakrasaṃvara 
lintel in full view of all who were allowed to enter 
(Fig. 4.4). In the lintel facing north, Pia Conti (2014 : 
386) has identified the central Buddha surrounded 
by four Jinas as Akṣobhya in the Esoteric form of Śrī 
Samāja, which he takes in the Guhyasamājatantra . 
Szántó and Griffiths (2015 : 370) see this Tantra as 
bridging 
31 The late Professor Claude Jacques of the École Pratique 
des Hautes Études (EPHE) lectured on his draft transla -
tion of the stone in April 2016 at the École française d’Ex -
trême-Orient (EFEO) in the unpublished paper entitled 
‘De la fragilité de notre science historique: la stèle K. 1297’ 
(Jacques 2016a). See Sharrock 2018.... the gap between the type of esoteric Bud -
dhism that still operates within the realm of 
ritual purity and that of transgressive, antino -
mian esoteric revelation ... The Śaṃvara was 
instrumental in introducing significant Śaiva 
elements into Buddhism ... enacting the pan -
theon in communal worship, the imagery of 
the cremation ground.
Further, Sanderson (2009 : 170–71) notes the icono -
graphical similarities between Śiva and Heruka:
The remnant features of Śiva’s iconography evi -
dent here are the trident, the third eye, the new 
moon on the piled up braids, the tiger-skin 
lower garment, the multiple faces and arms, 
the skull-bowl, the skull-staff, the bleeding ele -
phant hide representing illusion burst asunder, the severed head of Brahmā, the snake as brah -
Fig. 4.4: Cakrasaṃvara, bursting from the elephant 
hide of illusion and dancing on two māra s, descends 
from a band of cosmic Buddhas accompanied by 
Y oginīs and Vidyārājas in the eastern lintel of the 
Phimai central sanctuary. (Photo courtesy of Pia 
Conti)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   138 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 143] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia139
manical thread, the sharp fangs, the chaplet of 
skulls, his dwelling in the cremation grounds, 
and the ashes on his limbs. All these had en -
tered Śiva’s iconography long before the forma -
tion of the Tantras of the Cakrasaṃvara cycle.
Cakrasaṃvara is unmistakable as he dances in 
ardhaparyaṅka  posture on two crowned māra s. 
Though dramatic, the Phimai image is still com -
posed and constrained within the pervasively 
reserved Khmer tradition, which contrasts, for 
example, with this more typical and extravagant 
Indic text: 
Place in the center of the lotus the hero who 
is the terror of Mahābhairava, who is bright 
and brilliant, and who makes the tremendous 
noise of very loud laughter. Wearing a skull ro -
sary, divine are his three eyes and four faces. 
Covered with an elephant hide, his excellent 
eyebrows are split by a vajra. His hand wields 
a khaṭvāṅga  staff, [and he is] ornamented with 
a half a hundred garlands. ( Cakrasaṃvara  
2.14a–16b, in Gray 2006: 26) 
The Khmer reserve excluded the yab-yum icons of 
sexual union with the deity’s consort or mudrā , as 
defined in the texts and routinely reproduced in 
Tibet. It presumably circumscribed Khmer ritual 
performance. Hiram Woodward (1981 : 57) once 
memorably remarked, while describing a Hevajra 
in the Bangkok Museum, that in Khmer art ‘there 
need be no greater facial indication of Hevajra’s 
fierce aspect than open eyes. ’ In the sculptural 
corpus of the Khmer empire, Cakrasaṃvara is 
found on small bronze tablet moulds opposite 
Hevajra but the Phimai icon is one of only two 
known in stone. This is in contrast with the about 
100 elegant dancing Hevajras in bronze that have 
survived. Some of the most elegant may be stylis-
tically dated by their lithe limbs and courtly dress 
to the ‘Baphuon style’ that includes Jayavarman 
VI’s reign. 
The Hevajra bronzes impressed and puzzled art 
historian Jean Boisselier: 
The [tantric] bronzes from the 12th and 13th 
centuries constitute a fairly considerable group 
but with no stone statue being reported for 
the same period, the importance of the role 
these divinities could have played in Khmer Mahāyānist beliefs is strongly diminished. 
(Boisselier 1957: 324)
Boisselier presumably did not know that sixteen 
years before he wrote this, the EFEO had sold the 
broken bust of a large, eight-headed32 stone Hevajra 
to the New Y ork Metropolitan Museum, mistak -
ing it for a damaged eleven-headed Avalokiteśvara. 
Boisselier also had no idea that the stone Hevajra 
had probably dominated the main entrance to the 
Bayon for perhaps 100  years (see below). Curator 
Alan Priest (1937 ) in New Y ork however immedi-
ately recognized the bust as Hevajra. The EFEO 
recorded a second stone ‘Hevajra’ outside the West 
Gate of Angkor Thom. The eight-headed, twen -
ty-armed figure standing (not dancing) on four 
legs drew only a brief unsigned ‘Chronique’ note 
in the Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
in 1925  on ‘other [finds] outside the West gate of 
Angkor Thom ... brought interesting sculptures to 
light, including one image of Hevajra’ (Chronique 
1925 : 592 [my translation from French]; see Pl. 
LXVI, B). The New Y ork bust has now at last been 
reunited, electronically, with its dismembered parts, 
as we will see.
campā: mỹ sơn and dương long
A second Heruka, probably identifiable as Cakra-
saṃvara, was carved in stone more than a century 
after the Phimai lintel. If this identification is 
correct, it would imply that the Esoteric Buddhist 
maṇḍala was stretched to the empire’s eastern ex-
tremity in Vijaya, Campā. The icon is a high relief 
on a tympanum believed to have been erected on 
the high and imposing 40 m three brick towers 
of Dương Long temple, located near Vijaya port 
during the period of a renewed alliance with Angkor 
from 1203–c. 1220. This alliance began under King 
Sūryavarman II, who enlisted the support of Cam 
rulers each time this restless, campaigning king 
attacked the Đại Việt to the north. A Khmer prince, 
32 The uppermost eighth head was missing. Decades 
later it was found outside the Gate of the Dead of Angkor 
Thom and deposited in the Angkor Conservation depot in 
Siem Reap, only to be reported stolen in a 1992 break-in 
and reported missing in an ICOM booklet ‘ One Hundred 
Missing Objects: Looting in Angkor 1 Jan. 1993 ’.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   139 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 144] ---
Peter Sharrock140
who supported Sūryavarman’s mission in-country 
and who had a relatively weak claim to the Angkor 
throne, was later to seize power as King Jayavarman 
VII, the greatest builder in Angkor history. 
The long residence in Vijaya of the prince who 
would later be crowned Jayavarman and his engage -
ment in Cam culture and high politics came at a 
formative period of his adult life. The inscription at 
Mỹ Sơn temple group G, dated 1157 /8 CE, says that 
King Jaya Harivarman I was born in Vijaya (urāṅ 
ratna bhūmi Vijaya) and was respected throughout 
the Campā territories as far south as Pāṇḍuraṅ-
ga (Phan Rang) (Golzio 2004 : 161–162 , 166–168 ). 
When Jaya Harivarman later came into conflict 
with Khmer King Sūryavarman II and then with his 
successor Tribhuvanādityavarman, it seems likely 
that the future Jayavarman VII fought against them 
on the Cam side. This occurrence offers a possible 
explanation for why, when he became king, the 
inscriptions of Jayavarman’s reign showed little 
respect for his distinguished Esoteric Buddhist 
predecessor Tribhuvanādityavarman.33 
The central Dương Long tower is 42 m high—
the highest constructed in Campā and the same 
height as the Bayon in Angkor (Fig. 4.5 ). The scale 
of the construction was an early indicator of the 
coastal state’s growing wealth from the maritime 
trade route, which would take it to its apogee in the 
15th century (Whitmore 2018 ). The Khmer empire 
in contrast would soon begin to decline, and the 
neighbouring Thais would occupy Angkor when 
the Cams were at their peak. King Jayavarman VII 
had waged a ten-year military campaign to control 
Vijaya and its deep-water port, which was appar -
ently a joint project to profit from the growing 
Sung dynasty maritime trade. In the years from 
1203  CE to Jayavarman’s death in c. 1220  CE, the 
close alignment of the Khmers with the Cams left  
a cultural imprint on the temple art and statuary in 
Campā. Jean Boisselier (1963 : 256–297 ) designated 
this the ‘Tháp Mẫm style’ after a nearby temple left 
incomplete but with a rich collection of energetic, 
floriated statuary prepared for installation. This 
33 In an inscription written by Jayavarman’s wife, Tribhu -
vanādityavarman is ungraciously called ‘a servant ( bhṛtya ) 
who killed his master ( bhartṛ )’. K. 485, st. LXV and LXVI. 
Cf. Cœdès 1942 ( IC II): 161; Sharrock 2018: 114.style includes the Dương Long icon recently tenta-
tively identified as Cakrasaṃvara (Fig. 4.6 ).
The 100 cm Dương Long tympanum shows a 
deity dancing in a Khmer style sampot  with three 
heads visible—the faces have square jaws and wide 
smiling mouths without moustache and look de -
cidedly more Khmer than Cam. It was discovered 
in the 1980 s with other sculptures in an excavation 
by Polish archaeologists shortly after the end of the 
Vietnam war (Phương 2018 : 249). They thought 
it represented the god Brahmā, as still reflected 
in the label in today’s elegantly refurbished Bình 
Ðịnh provincial museum (‘Thần Brahma: the god 
Brahma, late 12 th/early 13th century, Dương Long 
tower’). After visiting the museum, epigrapher and 
historian Anne-Valérie Schweyer recently proposed 
it was a representation of Cakrasaṃvara:
Most likely, the temple of Heruka could be in 
Dương Long, where there was a relief depict -
ing Chakrasamvara—another form of Heruka. 
The Dương Long temple is very much influ -
enced by Khmer iconography, and I think it 
is most likely the ‘Heruka’s house’. (Schweyer 
2018: 77)
The identification is considerably less secure than 
that of the Phimai lintel as there is no clear elephant Fig. 4.5: Dương Long temple group near Vijaya port 
and the Tháp Mẫm ruin. (Photo courtesy of Trần Kỳ 
Phương)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   140 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 145] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia141
hide behind the deity. There are traces of a stylized 
oval shape behind the heads and beside the princi-
pal right arm but the feet that would have danced 
on the elephant’s head, as at Phimai, are lost. There 
are though clear similarities in the ardhaparyaṅ -
ka dance position, the Khmer facial features, the 
Khmer sampot chong kben and jewellery and the 
delicate and unusual hand-touching mudrā of the 
two principal hands. In Phimai the deity holds no 
attributes and six rear hands hold apart the thick, 
upside down elephant hide. The rear hands of the 
Dương Long figure hold two lotuses and two swords. 
If it was a Cakrasaṃvara on the great Dương 
Long tower, in this Khmer-influenced period, this 
could perhaps mean Jayavarman VII was extend-
ing to completion the Mahīdharapura dynasty 
maṇḍala of sacred Heruka geography under the 
protection of Cakrasaṃvara in Phimai, Hevajra 
in Angkor and Cakrasaṃvara at the eastern wing 
of the empire at Dương Long in central Vietnam.mỹ sơn and angkor 
Recent archaeological exploration of the Bayon 
temple in Angkor indicates that Heruka appeared 
there in a prominent exoteric position under King 
Jayavarman VII (r. 1182 –c. 1220 ). Jayavarman’s 
ascent began with his seizure power with Cam 
allies34 in a power vacuum left after Cam King Jaya 
Indravarman IV of Grāmapura crossed the moun-
tains in c. 1180  CE ‘in chariots’ to attack Angkor.35 
Buddhist King Tribhuvanādityavarman (r. 1149 –c. 
1180 ) was killed and the palace burnt. Jayavarman, 
allied with Cam military princes from his long 
sojourn in Campā fighting with Jaya Indravarman’s 
predecessor, emerged from hiding in an unidenti-
fied Khmer location to drive the Cams out and take 
control of the city. His claim to the throne was weak 
34 Vickery 2006: 110.
35 Cœdès 1
942b: 389, K. 485 LXVIII, Phīmãnàkàs.Fig. 4.6: Cakrasaṃvara (?) from Dương Long temple, Campā, now in the Bình Ðịnh Museum, Vietnam. (Photo 
courtesy of Anne-Valérie Schweyer). Fig. 4.6.1: Phimai Cakrasaṃvara. (Photo by author)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   141 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 146] ---
Peter Sharrock142
and he had adopted a low profile after racing back 
from Campā to try to help a relative who had earlier 
risen against Tribhuvanādityavarman (Sharrock 
2018 : 116). Once in power, Jayavarman’s vigorous 
response to the unprecedented Cam attack was to 
construct 8 m high ramparts stretching 3 km × 3 
km around his new capital Angkor Thom. Outside 
this he built six large walled complexes centred on 
Buddhist temples that securely housed the popu -
lation. The vast building programme was greater 
in volume than all his predecessors combined. At 
the heart of Angkor Thom, he erected a stone sky-
scraper with giant smiling faces on towers looking 
in all directions over the city. 
Inscription K. 1297  indicates that the first 
face-tower, considered the greatest architectural 
innovation of Angkor, was actually built by Tri-  
bhuvanādityavarman as Prasat Preah Stung in the 
major old Khmer Buddhist complex at Preah Khan 
of Kompong Svay, home of the Buddha of Vaṃśārā-
ma/Kaṃmrateṅ Jagat Chpār Ransi.36 Jayavarman 
adopted the model and made the towers the hall-
mark of the Bayon style, erecting a total of more 
than 100 at the Bayon and at Banteay Chhmar in 
the west. After studying the many earlier attempts 
to identify the deity in the face-towers—Brahmā, 
Avalokiteśvara, neak ta  local gods—I concluded a 
better fit with all the evidence would be Vajrasattva, 
the supreme eternal deity of Esoteric Buddhism. 
The visual effect of the multiple pacific faces on 
the towers, and the sublime effect of their smile, 
suspended in stone high above the city, impress 
many visitors as an attempt to express a cosmic 
vision of the supramundane. In a Vajrayāna milieu 
in the 13 th century, this could perhaps have had a 
natural affinity with the notion of a Vajradhara or 
Vajrasattva as the ultimate being and prime mover 
of the cosmos (Sharrock 2007 : 268 ). 
A decade after risking airing this hypothesis 
in my doctoral thesis, I learnt with an encourag-
ing shock that Tribhuvanādityavarman, the first 
builder of a face-tower, addressed what appears 
to be his main inscription (K. 1297 ) to Vajrasat- 
tva, according to a draft translation by Jacques and 
36 K. 1297 st. 35: ‘[also a tower with] quadruple faces 
[looking] in the four directions, with serpents on the side’ 
(trans. Jacques 2016: 11).an unpublished paper on the inscription by Ian 
Lowman (2016 : 1).
I praise the blessed Śrī Buddha Śrīvajrasattva, 
who is dual and non-dual ( dvayādvayaṁ ); the 
good law which protects; and the community 
that is multiple and compassionate. (Jacques 
2016a: 1)
Vajrasattva is central to what Linrothe identifies as 
‘Phase Three Esoteric Buddhism’ texts as the sixth, 
supreme, primordial ‘ Ādibuddha’ ,37 and ‘comprises 
all the Buddhas and who is ultimately identical 
with Hevajra himself ’ .38 As an icon, seated with 
vajra  held to the chest and ritual bell (ghaṇṭā) on 
his left hip, he first appears in the late 10 th to early 
11th centuries.39
At a 2008  colloquium in SOAS on the Bayon, 
Hiram Woodward observed a parallel between the 
stepped Greek cross base of the Bayon in the early 
phase 1.13 recorded by archaeo-architect Olivier 
Cunin (Fig. 4.7 ) and the stepped base of a well-
known gilt bronze Hevajra icon in the National 
Museum of Cambodia, Phnom Penh. In Cunin’s 
account, the Bayon was built first as a set of sanc-
tuaries grouped around a high central tower on a 
raised base in the shape of a Greek cross. It was then 
gradually extended over three decades outwards 
and downwards towards its outer gallery at ground 
37 Monier-Williams 1899: 136–137 defines the epithet ādi  
as ‘first, original, primordial’. Linrothe (1999: 238) observes 
that this concept ‘brought Phase Three Esoteric Buddhism 
perilously close to the notion of a supreme godhead ... a 
monist or pantheist conception ... anathema to Buddhism’.
38 Linrothe (1999: 27). He follows Snellgrove 1988: 1366: 
‘[A]ll these later tantras refer to a 6th supreme Buddha who 
unites the fivefold set within himself and is at the same 
time identical with the particular tutelary divinity of any 
particular tantra, Hevajra or any other.’
39 The dozen Khmer Vajrasattva icons in this posture in 
museum collections are relatively early and range from the 
late 11th century ‘Baphuon style’ to the later ‘Angkor Wat 
style’ of the mid-12th century. Estève and Vincent (2010: 151, 
n. 79) list five French scholars dating them to the 12th and 
13th centuries. Their valuable study of a 25 cm Angkor Wat 
style Vajrasattva bronze palanquin end piece for carrying 
a deity in procession ( ga 5303, bearing inscription K. 943 in 
the Phnom Penh Museum), surprisingly assigns the piece to 
the 14th century because of a single letter in the inscription 
judged to show the arrival of Middle Khmer. Inscription  
K. 1297 would suggest the reign of Tribhuvanādityavarman. 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   142 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 147] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia143
level in the centre of Angkor Thom city. Towards 
the end of this cycle, multiple giant faces as high 
as a person were carved as addorsed heads on the 
central stone tower that rises up 43  m over the city 
(Fig. 4.7.1). The bronze with a high, stepped base 
Woodward pointed to has been called a miniature 
sanctuary40 or palace because it has a framework 
of columns and capitals that fits over the deity and 
the circle of eight dancing Y oginīs in his maṇḍala 
(Fig. 4.7.2). Rather like the Bayon central sanctuary 
with its giant faces, the bronze deity with a tower 
of eight heads rises from the Greek cross base high 
above the Y oginīs dancing around him on a lotus 
platform (Fig. 4.7.3 ). The implication appeared to 
be that the bronze sanctuary may offer a key to 
unlocking the identity of the multiple deity heads 
in the Bayon tower. The question is then whether 
the Bayon is a massive rendering of the supreme 
Buddha Hevajra/Vajrasattva in architectural form. 
My impression was that Woodward raised this 
intriguing observation without committing to an 
identification. He has not, to my knowledge, gone 
on to develop or publish the observation of a Greek 
cross/tower of heads link. To do so would entail 
an adjustment from the position he took in 2004 , 
when he saw the Phimai advance in Tantrism and 
the Y oginītantras as later reduced to a secondary 
role in Angkor, where the older Mahāyāna of the 
Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra, centred on Avalokiteśvara, was 
again ‘held in highest esteem’ . 
For much of the eleventh and twelfth centu -
ries [the Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra ] teachings were 
somewhat eclipsed by the rise of followers of 
the Yoginī Tantras, associated with the temple 
of Phimai (in northeastern Thailand) and the 
emergence of a new dynasty. Then, during the 
reign of Jayavarman VII (1181–mid 1210s), the 
Kāraṇḍavyūha sūtra  teachings were again held 
in highest esteem, with the legacy of Phimai 
Tantrism playing a secondary role. (Wood -
ward 2004: 348)
Y et the question of whether the Bayon face-tow -
ers are a kind of blow-up that turns a state temple 
into a huge icon of the supreme deity has been 
broached by other scholars. For example, Bruno 
40 Dalsheimer 2001: 268.Dagens ( 2003 : 243) considered that ‘it is the inven-
tion of the face towers that makes architecture slide 
towards monumental statuary and temples towards 
divine image. ’ T.S. Maxwell (2007 : 86) went further, 
saying the face-towers turned the temple into a god:
In terms of architectural theory, the new meth -
od of depicting the four faces on the towers of 
Jayavarman’s temples appears to represent ... 
a sweeping liberalization of architecture and 
iconography, because this method abandons the canonical distinctions between vāstu and 
śilpa  ... The Khmer temple was therefore no 
longer merely a devagṛha , the traditional Indi -
an ‘house of God’, it became itself a God.
Merging śilpaśāstra  (statuary) and vastuśāstra  (ar-
chitecture) is unquestionably a major architectural 
innovation and many scholars have remarked on 
the originality of projecting supramundane faces 
high over the capital as the supreme architectural 
innovation of the classical Angkor period. 
Further, all entrances to the Bayon were en -
wrapped and embellished by emphatic friezes 
containing a total of approximately 6,250  celestial 
dancers in ardhaparyaṅka  posture, which I have 
suggested are projectors of a Y oginītantra cult.41
Rendering the state deity and maṇḍala in archi-
tecture was not confined to the capital. Cunin (2005 : 
83–85) increased the number of face-towers at the 
Bayon by eleven to a total to fifty-nine by tracking 
all stones bearing parts of carved faces from the 
collapsed towers inside and outside the Bayon outer 
gallery. He went on to record forty-seven face-tow-
ers in Banteay Chhmar, a large temple complex 110  
km northwest of the capital in a thinly populated 
zone under the Dangrek mountains.42 From the 
41 Sharrock 2006: 108; Sharrock 2013: 124.
42 Banteay Chhmar’s proximity to the Dangrek chain 
probably gave it special role in the new hospital network 
as the medicinal herbs, minerals (including gold, mercury 
and camphor) and animal parts were gathered there. Four 
‘satellite’ sanctuaries outside the main temple complex are 
built on the standard plan for hospitals and Banteay Chhmar 
may have been a centre for amassing, blessing and distribu -
tion to the large network, which included 30 hospital sites 
identified over the mountains in Khorat (modern Thailand). 
Furthermore, the largest 80 cm stone statue of the Khmer 
Bhaiṣajyaguru (Phnom Penh Museum ga 1714) was found 
in the temple.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   143 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 148] ---
Peter Sharrock144
Fig. 4.7: 3D archaeological reconstruction of the first architectural project of the Bayon temple. 
(Courtesy of Olivier Cunin)
Fig 4.7.1: Bayon central sanctuary. (Photo by 
author)
Fig 4.7.2: Gilt-bronze Hevajra maṇḍala in a palace 
structure on a stepped Greek cross base. (Photo by author)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   144 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 149] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia145
Fig 4.7.3: Dancing Hevajra, without palace, encircled by an 
incomplete set of his eight Y oginīs. (Photo courtesy of Emma C. 
Bunker)
Fig 4.7.4: Part of the frieze of dancers that enwraps all the entrances to the Bayon.  
(Photo by author)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   145 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 150] ---
Peter Sharrock146
Fig. 4.8: Map of Cambodia with locations of the Angkor site, Preah Khan of Kompong Svay and Banteay Chhmar. 
(Map courtesy of Olivier Cunin)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   146 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 151] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia147
viewpoint of sacred geography, the temples with the 
face-towers fit into a circle centred on Angkor and 
possibly define a new Buddhist maṇḍala of state 
(Fig. 4.8) that implants the face-tower deity across 
the kingdom, somewhat in the way Amoghavajra 
created the state as a field of merit on Mount Wutai 
in 767  (see footnote 6 above). 
If the face-tower sites are in this way projecting 
a Heruka maṇḍala over the Brahmanical Khmer 
state, Jayavarman can be seen as maintaining the 
Divākarapaṇḍita Mahīdharapura strategy men-
tioned above, rather than going back to an old Ava-
lokiteśvara model. (The Bhaiṣajyaguru maṇḍala 
of hospitals would form another Angkor-centred 
circle twice as large).
Davidson’s map, extracted from the Hevajratan -
tra and Saṁvarodayatantra , places the principal Heruka on Mount Kailāsa, which raises the ques-
tion of where did Jayavarman locate his. The first 
Heruka in the Khmer-Cam epigraphic record sug-
gests a challenge to this strategy, as it was raised in 
neighbouring Campā. Having crushed domestic 
resistance and fortified the capital, Jayavarman 
turned to restoring Campā, where he spent his 
formative years, to his empire. He assembled an 
army at Banteay Chhmar, at a safe distance from the 
perhaps still resistant Śaiva capital and launched its 
first expedition in 1190  under the command of the 
gifted Cam prince Vidyānandana, who had already 
put down the biggest recorded domestic rebellion 
against Jayavarman at Malyang in the western 
Khmer region. There is a rare detailed account 
of the Campā campaigns from two inscriptions—
one in Old Khmer language in Banteay Chhmar  Fig. 4.9: Banteay Chhmar Northern Gallery. King Jayavarman VII appears to consecrate prince Indrakumāra as 
king of Vijaya before the prince sets off to occupy the throne in Campā. (Photo by author)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   147 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 152] ---
Peter Sharrock148
(K. 227)43 and one in Old Cam language in Mỹ Sơn. 
The Cam version of events in inscription C. 92 B44 
says Vidyānandana led the Khmer army over the 
mountains and defeated the Cam defenders of the 
port of Vijaya. He then invited Khmer prince In -
drakumāra to take the Vijaya throne. Indrakumāra’s 
consecration in preparation for departing to Vijaya 
may possibly be shown in a low relief on the North -
ern Gallery of Banteay Chhmar (Fig. 4.9 ). 
There is as usual no inscription, but in the relief 
panel, the enlarged image of the king sits in cere-
monial dress with the sword of state while courtiers 
below him raise a chalice, perhaps holding water for 
a royal abhiṣeka. The smaller figure kneeling before 
him has the facial features and distinctive neck -
lace of the royal figure seen beside the king on the 
temple’s Eastern Gallery, who is usually taken to be 
Indrakumāra. Behind him sit three bearded Brah-
mins wearing high ritual headgear. Below them the 
cavalry looks ready to depart. When Indrakumāra 
arrived to take the Vijaya throne, Vidyānandana 
headed south to rule over Pāṇḍuraṅga as vassal of 
the new king in Vijaya. But the Cams soon rebelled 
against Indrakumāra, who fled back to Banteay 
Chhmar. With Indrakumāra gone, Vidyānandana 
marched on Vijaya to restore order and then turned 
against his patron in Angkor and declared himself 
King Sūryavarman of Vijaya and Pāṇḍuraṅga.45 
Two years later in 1194  a second Khmer army 
reached Vijaya and was defeated by Vidyānandana, 
who had already shown himself to be a brilliant 
general and an erudite ruler. Inscription C. 92 B 
says that in celebration he built ‘Lord Heruka’s 
mansion’ (pa ṅap ruma ḥ śrī herukaharmya) after 
his victory at Jairamya-vijaya.46 The Heruka icon 
is lost (destroyed?) but the 3 m × 3 m brick base 
of his mansion survives in Mỹ Sơn along with the 
high and elegant C. 92 B historical stela that stood 
beside it. His Heruka jinābhiṣekaḥ reaffirmed his 
status after two years on the throne but would also 
have transmitted a message of defiance and perhaps 
respect to his former patron in Angkor. 
43 Cœdès 1929: 309–315; Jacques 2015: 141–144.
44 Finot 1904: 972; Jacques 1995: 154; Schweyer 2009: 
327–328.
45 C. 92B, li
ne 8 (Finot 1904: 972).
46 Schwey
er 2018: 76.I asked Ācārya Malcolm Smith at a conference 
on Tantra organized at the Victoria and Albert 
Museum (London) in 2018  what such an event 
could mean in Buddhist terms. He said similar 
confrontations involving a mix of sacred conse -
cration and political expediency are known in 
Tibetan history, when the message was that both 
parties had attained participation in the supreme 
Heruka/Vajrasattva state of being that was beyond 
violence, so this should be reflected in the micro-
cosm between the earthly rivals. War often followed, 
however. Jayavarman’s response was to send a third 
Khmer army nine years later over the mountains to 
Vijaya, which defeated Vidyānandana in 1203  and 
drove him into exile.47 
heruka in the bayon
With Campā again closely aligned with Angkor, 
Jayavarman probably raised his own Heruka in 
sanctuary BY55  at the main eastern entrance to 
the Bayon state temple, according to experts now 
working on the monument. It could have been the 
ceremonial highpoint of Jayavarman’s indrābhiṣe -
ka or second coronation, the Indic consecration 
that confers cakravartin  status following a foreign 
acquisition.48 
Reconstructing the great Heruka of the Bayon 
that countered that in Vidyanāndana’s Mỹ Sơn 
mansion has taken almost a century. Some of the 
difficulty of uncovering the story of the statue, 
which must have been known to all Angkorians in 
the 13th century, lies in the absence of a Bayon ded -
ication stela, which may have identified the orig-
inal pantheon of the builder. Plus, the large stone 
Hevajra was dismembered and some of the parts 
dumped in the forest outside the city.49 The bust was 
47 Vidyānandana fled Vijaya with his court and generals 
in a fleet. He sought refuge in the Ðai Việt but this was 
refused so his fleet took to the ocean and disappeared from 
history.
48 A mason’s informal inscription in Khmer on the 
unfinished Northern Gallery of the Bayon reads ... śānti 
buvana bphon hon stac vanodesa nā stac thve vra ḥ ind
rā- 
bhiṣeka (‘... t
he peace of the whole universe. Then the king 
retires into the forest at the time when he celebrates the 
holy indrābhi ṣeka’) b
eneath a sketched relief of the king 
going into the mountains on an elephant (Cœdès 1932: 74).
49 Olivier Cunin presents a detailed and truly remarkable 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   148 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 153] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia149
sold to the New Y ork Metropolitan museum in 1937 , 
the legs, arms and broken hands were left in the 
forest. The feet were finally recovered seventy-five 
years later from a pond in front of the temple and 
identified three years later by Olivier Cunin. 
I have attempted tying the removal and dis -
memberment of such major Buddhist icons from 
the Bayon to Sanskrit inscription K. 470 . This in-
scription is dated 1327  CE by Cœdès and was found 
near the Bayon northeast corner gallery.50 (Pāli 
had replaced Sanskrit two decades earlier in royal 
epigraphy). This records the erection of a Śivaliṅga, 
presumably in the Bayon, in the first year of the 
reign of King Jayavarma-Parameśvara. There are 
still five Śivaliṅgas standing in situ in the Bayon 
today and many Bodhisattva and Buddha reliefs 
and high reliefs can still be seen re-carved into Śi- 
valiṅgas (Figs 3.10 –3.13 ). A second inscription in 
Sanskrit, the last recorded in a declining Angkor, is 
called ‘the Angkor Wat inscription’51 to a Śiva sanc-
tuary on the Kapilapura mound just northeast of 
computer reconstruction of the erection and dismember -
ment of the Hevajra and a large stone Avalokiteśvara at the 
eastern entrance to the Bayon in a lecture entitled ‘About 
some missing images of the Bayon temple’ given in May 
2018 at the ‘Exploring Angkor Symposium’ at the Asian 
Civilisations Museum (ACM), Singapore [https://www.
academia.edu/41385160/About_some_missing_images_of_
the_Bayon_temple; slides 96–98 illustrate the breaking up 
of the Hevajra].
50 Cœdès 1
932: 145.
51 Cœdès
 1968: 228.the Angkor Wat moat. Briggs attributes it to 1330 ?52 
There is a small ruined temple foundation there 
with a Śivaliṅga. The facts are few but if the return 
to Sanskrit and Śivapūjā, the erection of Śivaliṅ -
gas in the Bayon and the refashioning of Bodhisat- 
tva and Buddha reliefs into Śivaliṅgas inside the 
Bayon all came together, a case can be made for 
the great Buddhist temple at the centre of Angkor 
Thom being refitted for Śaiva ritual by a Śaiva king 
lacking the funds to build his own dynastic shrine 
in the long tradition of his predecessors. 
William Southworth, in an important article 
that deserves greater attention, traces a century of 
attempts to account for the clear and widespread 
signs of desecration of Buddhist art in the Angkor 
temples (Southworth 2014 a). In his conclusion he 
adds an element of caution while endorsing my 
own contribution to this enquiry (personal com -
52 Briggs 1948: 12. He adds: ‘A Sanskrit stele inscrip -
tion—the last Sanskrit inscription of ancient Cambodia 
which has come to light—was discovered at Angkor Wat 
and was translated into French and published by Abel 
Bergaigne in 1885, but it has never been given much atten-
tion by historians. This inscription records the foundation 
by King Jayavarma paramesvara of a hermitage to Siva. 
No date is given, but from the context it seems that this 
king had then been ruling a few years. So, it may be said 
with certainty that this king was on the throne until after 
1327, perhaps as late as 1330. This foundation and his name, 
however, seem to indicate that he was Sivaite’ (Briggs 1948: 
22). Cœdès characterized the inscription as ‘redolent with 
Śivaite mysticism’ (Cœdès 1968: 228).Figs. 4.10–4.13: Śivaliṅgas in situ  in the Bayon today and Bodhisattvas and Buddha reliefs carved into liṅgas—the 
last perhaps hatched out by later Theravādin users. (Photos by author)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   149 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 154] ---
Peter Sharrock150
munication, September 2020 ). I had written (2007 : 
233): 
In 1327, in his first year on the throne, Jayavar -
ma Parameśvara erected a Śivaliṅga in the (I 
would ask still Buddhist?) Bayon. Installing a 
Śivaliṅga in the Bayon immediately upon en -
thronement looks like a politico-religious act 
of some significance, so did Jayavarma Par -
ameśvara convert the whole Bayon for Śaiva 
ritual and then order the systematic desecra -
tion of Jayavarman VII’s other temples in Ang -
kor? The question cannot be answered with the 
data we have, but the question should be raised. 
Jayavarma Parameśvara’s 27-line record of his 
Bayon Śivapūjā, may quietly announce the ar -
rival of the desecrator of the Buddhist Bayon. 
On the evidence we have, there is no stronger 
candidate. 
Michael Vickery endorsed this analysis and em-
phasized the expression ‘a politico-religious act’ 
(Vickery 2006: 171). A political message does 
indeed seem to be reflected in the way many 
thousands of Buddha figures were chipped out 
of Jayavarman’s Buddhist temples and their long 
enclosure walls across the city, which contained 
compounds for large sections of the population. 
Further, a Japanese team53 uncovered a pit outside 
Jayavarman’s Banteay Kdei temple containing 274  
Buddhist icons many of which, as Southworth 
says, ‘had clearly been deliberately decapitated 
and buried in the sculptural equivalent of a mass 
grave’ (Southworth 2014 a: 202). Inside the temple 
there are five in situ Śivaliṅgas erected in outer and 
central inner galleries and there are many Bud-
dhist reliefs crudely re-fashioned into liṅgas and 
set on yonis in central sections of the temple. The 
re-chiselling of multiple Bodhisattvas and Buddhas 
into liṅgas, along with the erection of stone Śiva- 
liṅgas across the first, albeit tolerant, Khmer Bud-
dhist state temple in Angkor, still suggest to me 
a later re-furbishing of the monument for Śaiva 
ritual. K. 470 , according to Cœdès, firmly dates 
the erection of one of the liṅgas to Jayavarma Par-
ameśvara’s first year on the throne. His reign left  
the last epigraphic traces of Śaivism and the last use 
53 Ishizawa and Marui 2002: 206–208.of Sanskrit in Angkor, after probably 180 years of 
Buddhist kings on the throne. And the declining 
economy would have favoured refurbishment over 
new construction. The earlier Khmer withdrawal 
from the Chao Phraya basin in the west and from 
Campā in the east, along with the much smaller 
scale of the 13 th-century Theravāda temples of 
Preah Pallilay and Preah Pithu constructed near 
the palace, are among many indicators of a declin-
ing empire when Jayavarma Parameśvara came to 
power. Lacking the resource to maintain the long 
tradition of a new king constructing temples to his 
ancestors and to the state may have obliged him 
to reconfigure the grandiose Bayon at the centre 
of his capital. This hypothesis has some coherence, 
though it rests on limited evidence. Until more 
evidence emerges this king remains, in the view of 
the present author, the strongest candidate for what 
Southworth calls ‘The Alteration and Destruction 
of Buddhist Images at Angkor’. 
The French archaeological archive holds pho -
tographs of most of the dismembered parts of the 
Heruka statue excavated after workers uncovered 
them by accident in 1925  under a pile of earth in the 
forest beyond Angkor Thom, some 500  m outside 
the eastern Gate of the Dead in the king’s Angkor 
Thom city ramparts and close to the Siem Reap 
River.54 Most were taken to the Depot of the Con-
servation d’ Angkor and photographed. With the 
arms broken off and the feet missing, the statue 
was at first identified simply as ‘a giant’55 and  
54 Bruno Dagens gave a brief report on the site in the 
fore
st in 1969, when he assumed the presence of a pedes -
tal and suggested it was a destroyed ‘chapel’. Subsequent 
excavation by APSARA in 2009 showed this not to be the 
case as there was no sign of a building and the square stone 
pedestal was also assumed to have been removed from 
the Bayon. Dagens wrote: ‘In Jayavarman VII’s time, this 
dancing god [Hevajra] of the Mahāyānist pantheon enjoyed 
a certain popularity that is attested, if not in the epigraphy, 
at least by numerous representations in bronze and also 
in a large statue in stone: this latter, sadly very mutilated, 
represents the god dancing as in the bronze images. It 
was found in a chapel to the east of the Gate of the Dead 
of Angkor Thom, where several statues of Lokeśvara were 
also found’ (Dagens 1969: 143).  
55 Journal de Fouilles , 8 Marc h 1925 (EFEO Centre, Siem 
Reap): ‘Marchal excavated Avalokiteśvaras, the bust of “a 
giant”, his huge legs “in squat position”, a 1m pedestal 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   150 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 155] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia151
the 1.3 m bust (Fig. 4.14 ) eventually sold to the NY 
MET as an eleven-headed Avalokiteśvara with the 
uppermost head missing.
After studying a photocopy of the hand-written 
French Journal de Fouilles in the EFEO office in 
Siem Reap, I scrambled through the undergrowth 
and found the earth mound and the legs in 2009  
(Fig. 4.15). The conservation authority APSARA 
rapidly excavated the site and moved the legs to the 
Norodom Sihanouk Museum in Siem Reap. 
If the Hevajra was erected in the Bayon, where 
did it stand? One possibility is Bayon sanctuary 
BY52 , which is considered a late addition to the 
Bayon because it has a circle of Garuḍas below the 
lotus on its summit, an innovation from Banteay 
Chhmar brought down to Angkor. Archaeo-archi-
tect Olivier Cunin measured BY52 , which has large 
wooden doors that open inward, and concluded it 
was too small for the 3.6  m stone Hevajra (personal 
email,  December 2009 ). JASA (Japan-Apsara Safe-
guarding Angkor) expert Robert McCarthy later 
proposed (personal email) that the statue could 
have been erected in the larger adjacent sanctu-
ary BY55 . McCarthy photographed an oval trace 
in the sandstone floor of BY55 , which could have 
been caused by a heavy rounded statue pedestal 
(Fig. 4.16 ).
In 2013 the JASA group, working for many 
years to stabilize the Bayon, uncovered a large 
but obscure statue base with a tenon in a pond 
outside the main eastern entrance. Olivier 
Cunin, whose prodigious knowledge and da -
tabase of many thousands of Angkor stones is 
unmatched, came across the block three years 
later and identified it as the Hevajra’s four feet 
poised in a dance posture.56 Cunin conducted a 
detailed photographic study of BY52 and BY55  
and also settled on the latter as the site of the 
Hevajra. The uppermost head of the Hevajra was 
reported stolen in a 1992  break-in at the Siem 
Reap conservation depot (see footnote 32  above). 
carved from a single block, and 16 hands’ (my translation 
from French).
56 The broke
n off feet can be seen in slides 18, 21–23 in 
Cunin’s 2018 lecture in Singapore, https://www.academ -
ia.edu/41385160/About_some_missing_images_of_the_
Bayon_temple.Fig. 4.15: Heruka legs the author located in the forest 
outside Angkor Thom. (Photo by author)Fig. 4.14: Broken bust of Hevajra in NY MET Khmer 
Gallery. (Photo by author)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   151 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 156] ---
Peter Sharrock152
Fig. 4.16: Bayon sanctuary BY55 with circular trace of a pedestal base in the sandstone. 
(Photo by author)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   152 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 157] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia153
With the scattered pieces mostly reunited, Cunin 
produced a 3D computer simulation of the whole 
statue erected in BY55 , with a large Avalokiteśvara 
(also excavated from the mound of earth in the 
forest, and now in the National Museum) stationed 
behind it in BY52  (Fig. 4.17 ).
This huge stone Heruka erected in a prominent 
exoteric position in the state temple faced east 
across the mountains to Mỹ Sơn and Vijaya, where 
Vidyānanda had raised his Heruka. It also present-
ed difficulties for anyone entering the temple for 
the long annual calendar of state festivals. Ācārya 
Smith took the view that only people initiated 
into the Heruka would be allowed to pass through 
BY55  into the temple. He suggested some samaya  or pledge ceremony with water would be required. 
This could be the explanation long sought by art 
historians for why so many bronze conch-holders 
embossed with a dancing Hevajra, sometimes in a 
circle of eight Y oginīs, were discovered in Angkor 
and reached museum collections around the world. 
At least a dozen are in the material record and they 
would have more than supplied the samaya  needs 
of all the temples Jayavarman built in Angkor (Figs. 
4.18–4.20 ). Such a water consecration is described 
in a Tibetan manual Abhiṣekavidhi written by a 
scholar named as Prajñāśrī and translated by Snell-
grove ( 1987 : 254 ). The initiand asks:
Just as Vajrasattva has consecrated former con -
querors, do thou, well qualified, feel love for 
me and bestow the Vidyā consecrations!
  Then the m
aster collects water from the Jar 
of Victory and the other jars, pouring it into 
a scoop made of shell. He directs his thoughts 
towards Akṣobhya, worships and praises him 
and then envisions him dissolved in light ... 
Fig. 4.17: Simulation of the archaeological reconstruction of the Hevajra (DCA.751) and Lokeśvara (Ka.1695) 
statues into the towers 55 and 52 of the Bayon temple presented at the Asian Civilisations Museum, Singapore. 
The image combines Cunin’s computer restitution of the icon with a 3D scan by photogrammetry of the floors of 
the towers. (Courtesy of Olivier Cunin)5757
57 Cunin presented his findings in a lecture ‘About some 
missing images of the Bayon temple’ in May 2018 at the 
‘Exploring Angkor Symposium’ at the Asian Civilisations 
Museum (ACM), Singapore.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   153 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 158] ---
Peter Sharrock154
Thus he envisages it, as he takes the water in 
the scoop and bestows the Water Consecration, 
reciting the mantra: OṂ Vajra-Jar consecrate 
HUṂ!
east java
A political confrontation between Java and China 
that included supreme Buddha consecrations oc -
curred half a century later and has drawn the atten -
tion of several scholars.  Siṅhasāri King Kṛtanagara 
(r. 1268 –1292  CE) underwent a consecration after 
receiving envoys from the Yuan emperor Kublai 
Khan (r. 1260 –1294  CE), who had construct -
ed a fleet and was threatening a naval invasion.58 
Thomas M. Hunter’s reading of the Sanskrit inscrip-
58 David Bade points out that many scholars have seen 
Kubl
ai’s prime motivation for undergoing the Vajrayāna 
empowerment as ‘an instrument of rule in order to justify 
his military conquest and reign over Tibet’ (Bade 2016: 
141). But the motivation would also have underwritten the 
aggressive messages of Kublai’s envoys to Java from 1279 
to 1286 CE calling for submission and the sending of royal 
hostages to Beijing as recorded in the Yuan shi. With his 
fleet,  Kublai invaded Campā and the Đai Việt as well as 
Java and attempted to invade Japan.tion on the base of the so-called ‘Joko Dolog’ statue 
of the Jina Akṣobhya, now in a park in Surabaya, 
commemorates both the reunification of Java by 
his father and his own second consecration of this 
image of Akṣobhya carried out in 1289  CE: 
This second consecration of the image of 
Akṣobhya was accompanied by a ritual in 
which Kṛtanagara was initiated according 
to the rites of Mahākṣobhya ... It is clear that 
this symbolic and ritual act was meant to have 
far-reaching effects. As scholars have large -
ly agreed since the idea was first advanced by 
J.L. Moens,5959 Kṛtanagara’s consecration into 
the ritual path of Akṣobhya (and hence the 
Guhyasāmaja Tantra ) appears to have been 
intended to counteract the ritual power gained 
by the Yuan emperor Kublai Khan through his 
consecrations in 1264 and 1269 as Hevajra, the central Jina of the Hevajra Tantra . This con -
nects the event with Kṛtanagara’s earlier gift to 
59 Moens 1924: 544. In Bade’s translation of the key 
passage: ‘The most well-known of these rulers of China, 
Kublai Khan, contemporary of Kṛtanagara, was consecrat -
ed as Jina through the Hevajrābhiṣeka ... The iṣṭadevatā 
of Kṛtanagara, who thought of himself as Kublai’s match, 
should not have been less demonic’ (Bade 2016: 141, n. 2).Figs. 4.18–4.20: Bronze lustration conch-holders cast with Hevajra’s maṇḍala in the National Museum of 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh. (Photos by author)
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   154 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 159] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia155
Mauliwarmadewa, for this monarch controlled 
the Melaka Straits, which was the linch-pin in 
the all-important international sea trade, and 
an obvious point that needed to be defended at all costs from the expansionist politics of Kub -
lai Khan. (Hunter 2007: 40) 
Max Nihom (1986 : 497) found that the text yielded 
a somewhat obscure description of the king as 
Bhaṭāra Śiva-Buddha reflecting the dharmakāya  
of Mahākṣobhya, who issues as ... 
Vajradhara himself, the teacher of the Heva-  
jratantra , [who] when he does appear … is 
an extravagance with 8 faces, 4 legs and 16 arms (II.v.8) [i.e. Hevajra] ... Although many aspects of the cult are as yet opaque—for ex -
ample, the precise nature of the gaṇacakra  of 
Nāg[arakṛtāgama]. 43.3d—based on the results 
offered above there is good reason to suppose 
that a cult of Hevajra was practised by the royal 
house. As such, the consecration of Kṛtanagara 
was indeed in all probability a consequence, in 
syncopation or reaction, to the tantric conse -
crations of Kublai Khan.
The Yuan emperor’s empowerment in the Hevajra 
cult in 1264  and 1268  CE was performed by 
Tibetan Sa skya master ’Phags pa, and inaugurat -
ed a century of Tibetan Buddhism as the official 
religion of China under Mongol rulers, before the 
Sakya transmission was deemed heterodox under 
the Ming (1368 –1644  CE) (Elacqua 2017 : 1304 ). The 
ceremony, recorded from a Tibetan Sa skya view-
point in a 16 th–17 th century painting at the Rubin 
Museum, New Y ork, shows Kublai as a tiny figure 
with hands pressed together in respect, beside a 
much bigger ’Phags pa, the Imperial Preceptor or 
Ti-shih and nephew of the leading Tibetan scholar 
and Sa skya Paṇḍita.60 ’Phags pa, whom Willemen 
(1983 : 16, n. 28 ) says ranked second only to the 
emperor in power, is seated for the ceremony on 
the emperor’s throne in the palace in Dadu (Beijing) 
with the diminutive Kublai beside him. The rela-
tive sizes of the figures appear to reflect a dispute, 
60 ‘Initiation of Qubilai Khan and offering Tibet to 
Phakpa in 1264’, 16th–17th century: https://rubinmuseum.
org/collection/artwork/initiation-of-qubilai-khan-and-of -
fering-tibet-to-phakpa-in-1264 (last accessed 5 April 2020).which Grünwedel traced in Tibetan accounts over 
relative chair heights for the consecration ceremo-
ny.61 The Mongol emperor responded by conferring 
on ’Phags pa suzerainty over three regions of Tibet. 
Another form of the emperor’s Hevajrābhiṣeka62 is 
suggested by a remarkable set of ma ṇḍalic aids f
or 
submission to the deity that was once on public 
display in Beijing (the railing behind the figures 
still stands outside the Forbidden City): six large 
bronze yab-yum couples sitting on mounts that 
include an elephant, a man, a buffalo, a bull, a goat 
and a gazelle. They were photographed in the 1920 s 
before they disappeared without trace.63 Pott ( 1966 : 
70) thought a maṇḍala on this scale could only 
have ‘featured in the consecration of a sovereign, 
perhaps at Kublai’s Hevajravaśitā [“submission to 
Hevajra”]. ’64
David Bade’s scalpel cuts neatly through the 
historiographical presuppositions in the accounts 
of realpolitik motivation assumed in much of the 
recent scholarly consensus on the Kublai–Kṛtana-
gara confrontation. He counters this by arguing that 
both rulers turned to the Esoteric Buddhists for a 
61 Albert Grünwedel wrote the first European account of 
’Phags pa travelling under duress (as a hostage?) to Dadu 
(Beijing) where he eventually conferred the initiation of 
Hevajrābhiṣeka on the emperor. According to Tibetan 
legend, the Chinese had appropriated the text of the Heva -
jratantra  before ’Phags pa had read it, so the god Mahākāla 
brought it to him for overnight study. The Lama, after agree -
ing to compromise on having chairs of the same height, 
initiated the emperor and was granted in return political 
and religious sovereignty over much of Tibet (Grünwedel 
1900: 63–65).
62 I am grateful for Iain Sinclair’s elucidation of the terms 
‘Hevajrābhiṣeka’, ‘Hevajravaśitā’, and ‘Hevajrasekaprakriyā’ 
in Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese for naming this crucial 
consecration ritual.
63 See E.E. Schlieper’s photograph in Laufer 1922: 14, 
accessible at https://archive.org/details/milaraspatibetis -
00milauoft/page/14/mode/2up (last accessed 10 September 
2020). I am grateful to a peer reviewer for locating this 
image.
64 Pott 1966: 70. Alternatively, the bronzes may have been 
created for a performance of the Cakrasa ṃvarata ntra , for 
with the addition of a horse and a makara , these mounts 
would correspond exactly with the eight ksetrapāla  of this 
Tantra, in which Sa ṃvara, a nother Heruka contemporary 
with Hevajra, is described ripping open an elephant hide 
representing illusion (Avalon, Kazi Dawa Samdup and 
Lokesh Chandra 1987: 20). 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   155 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 160] ---
Peter Sharrock156
new vision when they were faced with international 
issues of a scope and complexity unknown in their 
own cultures. They put their trust in a compelling 
image of a cakravartin  at the pinnacle of a maṇḍala 
that mirrored the organization of the macrocosm. 
Bade (2016 : 158) rightly commends Kate O’Brien’s 
reading of Mpu Tantular’s classic 14 th-century 
kakavin  Sutasoma65 as a poetic rendering of the 
spiritual meaning of the confrontation as it was 
perhaps understood in 14 th-century Java. O’Brien 
sees the kakavin  hero prince Sutasoma as Kṛtana-
gara, whose mission is to save humanity from the 
man-eating demon king Poruṣāda (= Kublai). Suta -
soma discovers himself through a series of battles—
won with ‘Buddha-Mind, the weapon of Absolute 
Knowledge’ , and not by violence—to become ‘Wai-
rocana in mortal embodiment’ and the lord of the 
maṇḍala after defeating Poruṣāda (ibid .). In Bade’s 
view, O’Brien here seems to approach a more au-
thentic 14th-century Javanese view of the nature 
of what he dubs ‘(spi)ritual warfare—as well as a 
naval campaign and land battles’ (Bade 2016 : 158):
Tantric Buddhism, with its imagination of a 
just and universal world ruler bringing about a 
state of affairs on earth that would mirror the 
heavenly state of affairs—the world as it ought 
to be—was not just a fantasy world of escape 
for monks and a useful mask hiding ugly re -
alities for kings; it was a powerful motivating 
force that shaped political and social condi -
tions throughout Asia.… The development of 
Tantric Buddhism and modern science were 
both responses to the world in a particular 
time and place, and both were/are oriented by 
the idea that knowledge is power, total knowl -
edge being total power. ( ibid.: 155–56)
65 Mpu Tantular was a poet and  purohi ta at the court 
of King Hayam Wuruk of Majapahit (r. 1350–1389 CE). 
The Sutasoma  holds one mention of Heruka in canto 
124b.9d–10: ‘Having attained that [knowledge (gnosis) of 
Non-duality], he is considered to be Jinapati, the highest 
point of the State of the Absolute. […] His behaviour had 
many aspects—among other things he held a corpse (over 
his head) as if it were a parasol while performing concen -
tration of the mind[.] Smelly blood flowed; drops of it fell 
on his head and ran down his chest. Its intestines were a 
tangled mass, green flies on (his) face crawled into (his) 
eyes, [n]evertheless his mind was unswerving in its quest 
to bring forth the Lord Heruka’ (trans. O’Brien 2008: 137).Lokesh Chandra (1995 : 156) sees Kṛtanagara’s 
response as aimed to both arrest the Mongol threat 
‘... and to pay homage to the Mongol Emperor’ . 
Paying homage seems aligned with Ācārya Smith’s 
view (above) that participation in the supreme 
Heruka/Vajrasattva state of being took initiates 
beyond violence and that this should be reflected in 
mundane inter-state actions. Kṛtanagara was killed 
in 1292  CE before the huge Mongol fleet landed, 
but the invasion failed (as the others did in Japan 
and Vietnam) and the East Javanese dynasty ‘was 
restored in 1294  CE by [Kṛtanagara’s son-in-law] 
Raden Wijaya, who tricked Kubilai’s invading forces 
into attacking [his rival] Jayakatwang, then turned 
on them and destroyed them as they celebrated 
victory’ (Hunter 2007 : 28).66 Hunter attributes the 
ongoing Esoteric Buddhist tradition in Java and 
Sumatra to the lasting impression made by Kṛta-  
nagara’s fusion of Śaivism and Buddhism to attain 
political and spiritual unity both in Java and in 
his growing empire. In 1292  CE Kṛtanagara was 
enshrined at Candi Jawi in a single Śiva-Buddha 
image after his ‘release into the realms of Śiwa and 
Buddha (mokteng siwa-buddha-loka)’ (ibid. : 41).
sumatra 
Andrea Acri (2016 : 8, 19–22) sees the Esoteric 
Buddhist cults of Jayavarman VII, Kṛtanagara and 
Kublai Khan as a ‘second wave’ that long remained 
vital in Maritime Asia. In the early 11 th century, 
the collapsing Pāla dynasty in northern India led 
to an exodus from the Ganges Valley monasteries 
in Bengal and Bihar. The future Tibetan Buddhist 
patriarch Atiśa (982 –1054  CE) undertook what was 
later called a dangerous sea passage to Śrīvijaya 
where he studied at the feet of the guru Dharmakīr -
ti from 1013 –25 CE, presumably at the pīṭha named 
as Suvarṇadvīpa (‘Isle of Gold’) in the lists cited 
in the Hevajratantra and the Saṃvarodayatantra . 
Tibetan archives credit Dharmakīrti with a com -
mentary on the Tantra. Schoterman (2016  [1986 ]: 
115) notes attacks from Kabul in 1018  by Mahmūd 
of Ghaznī ‘almost reaching Benares (which he plun -
dered in 1033 ) and attacking Somnāth (Kathiawar) 
66 Munoz (2006: 260–274) says the Chinese, battered and 
running short of supplies, cut their losses and left rather 
than wait months for the winds to turn.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   156 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 161] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia157
in 1024 .’ For a time Suvarṇadvīpa emerged as a 
haven for Buddhist study:
Although the Buddhism in northeastern India 
during this period was not yet directly con-
fronted with Islam, it was highly susceptible 
to infiltration by various Tantric currents, as 
a result of which ‘classical’ Buddhism virtually 
disappeared. It is not difficult to imagine that 
Śrīvijaya took over the role of northeast India 
in this period. There one could study classical 
Buddhism in peace. (Schoterman 2016 [1986]: 
115)
But this was soon to change. The Cōḻa army 
marched from south India to the north and then 
became the first Indian dynasty to expand its 
empire by sea. In 1025  CE the Cōḻa fleet attacked 
and largely destroyed Palembang and Jambi on 
Sumatra, as well as Kedah on the Malay Peninsu-
la. Months before this, Atiśa returned to Bengal 
to become abbot of Vikramaśīla, before being 
eventually invited to Tibet in 1040  CE to begin 
the celebrated reform mission of his remaining 
fourteen years. Schoterman (2016  [1986 ]: 115) 
paints a bleak picture of Sumatra in the late 11th 
and 12th centuries:
Weakened by the attacks from southern India 
at the hands of the Cōḻas ... Śrīvijaya lost its 
prominent position in the Buddhist world. Per-
haps this is borne out in another manuscript of 
the previously mentioned Aṣṭasāhasrikā Pra-
jñāpāramitā ... which dates from 1071. In this 
manuscript we also find a series of miniatures 
of Buddhist sanctuaries in India and beyond. 
The island of Sri Lanka is again mentioned 
thrice, which suggests that little changed in the 
intervening period. As regards the Indonesian 
Archipelago, however, the picture has radical-
ly altered. Only Java is still mentioned. Both 
Śrīvijaya and Kedah have disappeared from the 
list of important Buddhist sanctuaries. 
In neighbouring East Java, there is little evidence 
of the Buddhist Tantras being influential under the 
Kaḍiri dynasty (929– 1222) but Woodward (2004: 
344) thought some maṇḍala bronzes in the Suro-  
colo hoard could suggest an early 11th-century entry for the Hevajratantra. Lokesh Chandra and 
Sudarshana Devi Singhal (1995) considered half 
the pieces as belonging to Hevajra’s maṇḍala—
three of his eight Yoginīs, four heavenly musicians 
and two of the animal-headed female door guard-
ians. Tanaka (2018: 219) says the Surocolo bronze 
statuettes are identified by Buddhist iconographer 
Matsunga Keiji ‘... as a three-dimensional maṇḍala  
of the Vajrasattva family of the Samāyogatantra.’
Sumatra was recovering from the Cōḻa on -
slaught in the late 13th century when Kṛtanagara 
expanded the alliances of the Siṅhasāri dynasty to 
the Malayu King Maulivarmadeva. Kṛtanagara’s 
move eastwards possibly provoked the erection, 
as a defence mechanism, of the Padang Lawas 
Heruka mentioned earlier (Fig. 4.1). The complex 
of temples there was part of the polity of Panai, 
a Malayu/Jambi-dependency, and was active 
from the 10th to the 14th centuries. The Heruka 
with almost identical pose, ritual accoutrements, 
flaming aureole around Akṣobhya in the mukuṭa  
and robe flying up the backslab, is carved in a 
local tufa stone and is indeed very close in style 
and arrangement to those in Śubhapur, Nālandā, 
and Ratnagiri. All hold the skull-staff khaṭvāṅga, 
skull-bowl padmabhājana, and drum (ḍamaru) 
bestowed after the fourfold empowerment ritual.
Inscribed stones at the site (some incorporating 
phrases from the Hevajratantra, according to Grif -
fiths 2014: 18– 22) near the three main towers bear 
dates of 1179, 1245, and 1372 CE (Bautze-Picron 
2014: 108 n. 3 ). Dating the Heruka is difficult, the 
13th century being the most likely option. Rela -
tions with the expanding Rājarāja Cōḻa dynasty in 
Tamil Nadu were cordial until Panai was hit in a 
surprise raid, through the western Sumatran port 
of Barus that heralded the start of King Rājendra 
Cōḻa’s devastating invasion of 1025. But despite 
the close stylistic parallels with the 11th-centu -
ry north Indian icons, the erection of the Panai 
Heruka is more likely to have been long after the 
Cōḻa invasion. The presence in Padang Lawas of a 
small stone icon of Mahākāla, one of the Bhaira-
va-like defenders of Buddhism, matches similar 
icons of the Siṅhasāri dynasty. Having suffered 
under the Cōḻas, the Panai kings may have sought 
supernatural protection against the expanding 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   157 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 162] ---
Peter Sharrock158
empire in neighbouring Java. Its spiritual/polit -
ical message may have been similar to that of the 
Heruka dedicated in Campā (inscription C. 92 B) 
by Cam prince Vidyānandana, who broke with his 
Khmer backers and proclaimed sovereignty (see 
above). We will return later to Sumatra.
During the subsequent expansion of the Ma -
japahit golden age under King Hayam Wuruk (r. 
1350 –1389  CE), celebrated today as setting the 
bounds of modern Indonesia, one of the king’s 
cousins moved to Sumatra as King Ādityavar -
man (c. 1347 –1379 ), securing control of the gold 
mines and the trade through the Melaka Straits.67 
He eventually asserted autonomy within the now 
sprawling empire by adding an epigraph re-ded-
icating to himself the famous Amoghapāśa stela 
sent by Kṛtanagara decades earlier to celebrate a 
marriage alliance. Ādityavarman moved the stela 
to Padang Candi, leaving behind Kṛtanagara’s in-
scribed pedestal, and in an unpolished Sanskrit 
on the back upgraded his title to the supreme title 
maharājādhirāja, a title reserved for his cousin in 
East Java. A few years later he ‘moved the capital to 
Saruaso ... a safe haven in Malayu’s fertile moun-
tainous hinterland’ (Kozok and van Reijn 2010 : 
136) that controlled the output of the gold mines. 
At Sungai Langsat he raised Indonesia’s largest 
known statue, a 4.4  m ‘Bhairava’ with bulging eyes, 
a knife at his chest, standing on a skull pedestal and 
with Akṣobhya set in his huge ball of ascetic hair 
(Figs. 4.21, 4.22). Bautze-Picron considers ‘Bhaira -
va’ a misidentification and sees it as the fierce Bud -
dhist deity Mahākāla, protector of Kublai Khan’s 
Yuan court (Bautze-Picron 2014 : 113–114). Could 
this image represent another link back to Kublai’s 
Javanese contemporary Kṛtanagara? The only ref-
erent in this period for the scale of the statue, the 
pedestal of skulls, the fine quality of the stone and 
67 ‘Adityavarman, a devotee of Tantric Buddhism, became 
immensely powerful and was in effect independent as king 
of the Minangkabau highlands, which produced gold and 
also had developed intensive rice cultivation. Subsequent 
attempts by Java to reassert its authority were to lead in 
about 1391 to the flight of a prince of Melayu to Temasek 
and then to the founding of Melaka’ (Bowring 2019: 114–115).sophisticated carving is Kṛtanagara’s kingdom; 
nothing comparable is known from Sumatra (Acri 
and Wenta 2022 ). Hunter (2007 : 40–41) describes 
the Śiva-Buddha image in Kṛtanagara’s mortuary 
temple as follows:
Perhaps the most spectacular evidence of 
Kṛtanagara’s drive to carry forward the cause 
of political and symbolic unity initiated by 
his predecessors is the exceptional case of his 
post-mortem enshrinement at Candi Jawi as a 
single ‘Śiwa-Buddha image’ (siwa-buddhârca), 
that the Desawarnana commemorates as his 
‘release into the realms of Śiwa and Buddha’ 
(mokteng siwa-buddha-loka) in the year 1292 
CE. In its outward appearance the shrine at Candi Jawi reveals a unique linkage of Shaivite 
and Buddhist elements. The slim, tapering 
spire of the main shrine links it with the form 
of temple spire favoured in Shaivite sanctuar-
ies of East Java, while its capstone, in the form 
of a stupa, represents the Buddhist element. 
Most remarkably, the image within the main 
shrine also combined Shaivite and Buddhist 
elements:
mwang ri jro Siwa-wimba sobhita ha-
lep-niraparamita 
Aksobhya-pratime ruhur (m)makuta 
tan hanoly n-tika 
And within there was a splendid Shi-
va-image, its beauty fitting, without 
parallel (With) an image of Aksobhya 
above the crown, of that there can be no 
doubt. [Robson, Deśavarnana ( Nāgara-  
kṛtāgama), 56.2]
The Saruaso II inscription mentions Ādityavar -
man’s son, the crown prince Anaṅgavarman as 
daily practising ‘meditation on Hevajra’ (heva-
jranityāsmṛtiḥ). This concludes the overt signs of 
the long ‘second wave’ of royal Esoteric cults in 
Maritime Asia.
Having virtually died out in the Indian Sub-continent by the late 13th century, it continued 
to live or even thrive—in its localized adapta-
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   158 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 163] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia159
tions—until the 15th century in Java and Suma-
tra (e.g., under King Ādityavarman, r. ?–1375), 
and to the present day in Nepal, Tibet, Bali, and Japan. (Acri 2016: 8)
The ritual technology of the Heruka-maṇḍalas, the 
fruit of an historical fusion of Indic tantric Śaiva Figs. 4.21, 4.22: Ādityavarman’s Bhairava/Mahākāla with Akṣobhya, Jakarta National Musuem. (Photos by author)
and Buddhist ideologies, attained its political flo-
rescence not in the subcontinent, where its long-
term application was cut short by the rise of armed 
Islam, but in the politico/religious strategies of 
the royal courts of Maritime Asia from Phimai to 
Angkor to Mỹ Sơn to Siṅhasāri and Sumatra over 
more than three centuries. 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   159 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 164] ---
Peter Sharrock160
References
Abé, Ryūichi. 1999. The Weaving of Mantra: Kūkai 
and the Construction of Esoteric Buddhist Dis-
course. New York: Columbia University Press.
Acri, Andrea. 2016. ‘Introduction: Esoteric Bud -
dhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes, 
7th–13th Century AD’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 1–25. Sin -
gapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Acri, Andrea and Aleksandra Wenta. 2022. ‘A 
Buddhist Bhairava? Kṛtanagara’s Tantric 
Buddhism in Transregional Perspective (Thir -
teenth–Fourteenth Centuries CE)’, in Entan -
gled Religions . In press.
Avalon, Arthur, Kazi Dawa Samdup, and Lokesh 
Chandra (eds.). 1987. Shrichakrasambhara 
Tantra/Sri-Cakrasamvara-Tantra. A Bud-
dhist Tantra. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. 
[Reprint of Avalon and Kazi Dawa Samdup 
1919, London, Luzac & Co.]
Aymonier, Étienne F. 1901. Le Cambodge vol. II: 
les provinces siamoises. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Bade, David. 2016. ‘(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Cen -
tury Asia? International Relations, the Balance 
of Powers, and the Tantric Buddhism of Kṛtana -
gara and Khubilai Khan’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 141–159. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 2014. ‘Buddhist Images 
from Padang Lawas Region and the South 
Asian Connection’, in Daniel Perret (ed.),  
History of Padang Lawas II. Societies of Padang 
Lawas (mid-9th–13th century CE), Cahiers 
d’Archipel vol. 43, pp. 107–128. Paris: Asso-
ciation Archipel. 
Boeles, J.J. 1966. ‘Two Yoginīs of Hevajra from 
Thailand’, in Essays Offered to G.H. Luce by 
His Colleagues and Friends in Honour of His 
Seventy-Fifth Birthday. Volume 2: Papers on 
Asian Art and Archaeology : Artibus Asiae. Sup -
plementum, vol. 23, pp. 14–29. Zurich.
Boisselier, Jean. 1957. ‘Vajrapani dans l’art du 
Bàyon’, in Zeki Velidi Togan (ed.), Proceed-
ings of the 22nd Congress of Orientalists, vol. 2, 
Communications, pp. 324–332. Leiden: Brill.. 1963. La Statuaire du Campà: recherches 
sur les cultes et l’iconographie. Paris: École fran -
çaise d’Extrême-Orient. 
Bosch, F.D.K. 1930. ‘Verslag van een reis door 
Sumatra’ (Report of a Journey through 
Sumatra), Oudheidkundig Verslag, Bijlage C: 
133–157.
Bowring, Philip. 2019. Empire of the Winds: The 
Global Role of Asia’s Great Archipelago. London: 
I.B. Tauris, Bloomsbury Publishing.
Briggs, Lawrence P. 1948. ‘Siamese Attacks on 
Angkor Before 1430’, The Far Eastern Quar -
terly 8/1: 3–33.
. 1999 [reprint 1951]. The Ancient Khmer 
Empire. Bangkok: White Lotus.
‘Chronique’. 1925. Bulletin de l’École française d’Ex -
trême-Orient 25: 543–595.
Cœdès, George. 1923. Bronzes khmèrs. Paris: Ars 
Asiatica.
. 1929. ‘Études Cambodgiennes XXIV. Nou -
velles donnés chronologiques et généalogiques 
sur la dynastie de Mahīdharapura’, Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 29: 309–315.
. 1932. ‘Études Cambodgiennes XXVIII. 
Quelques suggestions sur la méthode à suivre 
pour interpréter les bas-reliefs de Bantéay 
Čhmàr et de la galerie extérieure du Bàyon’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
32: 71–112.
. 1942a. ‘Inscription du Bàyon K. 470’, Ins-
criptions du Cambodge, Vol. 2, pp. 187–189. 
Hanoi: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
. 1942b. ‘Grande stèle du Phīmãnàkàs’ (K. 
485), Inscriptions du Cambodge, Vol. 2, pp. 
161–392. Hanoi: École française d’Extrême-
Orient. 
. 1968. The Indianized States of Southeast 
Asia (ed. Walter F. Vella, trans. Sue Brown 
Cowing). Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i 
Press.
Conlan, Thomas D. 2011. Sovereign to Symbol: 
An Age of Ritual Determinism in 14th Century 
Japan. New York: Oxford University Press.
Conti, Pia. 2014. ‘Tantric Buddhism at Prasat Hin 
Phimai: A New Reading of Its Iconographic 
Message’, in Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. 
Murphy (eds.), Before Siam: Essays in Art and 
Archaeology, pp. 374–395. Bangkok: River Books.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   160 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 165] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia161
Cunin, Olivier. 2005. De Tà Prohm au Bàyon: 
contribution à l’histoire architecturale du temple 
du Bàyon. PhD thesis, Institut National Poly-
technique de Lorraine.
. 2018. ‘About some missing images of the 
Bayon temple’. Lecture at the ‘Exploring 
Angkor Symposium’ at the Asian Civilisations 
Museum (ACM), Singapore. [https://www.
academia.edu/41385160/About_some_missing_
images_of_the_Bayon_temple]
Dagens, Bruno. 1969. ‘Étude sur l’iconographie du 
Bàyon (frontons et linteaux)’, Arts Asiatiques  
19: 123–167.
. 2003. Les Khmers. Paris: Éditions les belles 
lettres.
Dalsheimer, Nadine. 2001. Le collections du musée 
national de Phnom Penh. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient/Magellan & Cie.
Dasgupta, S.B. 1950. An Introduction to Tantric 
Buddhism. Calcutta: University of Calcutta.
Davidson, Ronald M. 1991. ‘Reflections on the 
Maheśvara Subjugation Myth: Indie Materi-
als, Sa-skya-pa Apologetics, and the Birth of 
Heruka’, Journal of the International Associa-
tion of Buddhist Studies 14/2: 197–235.
. 2005. Tibetan Renaissance: Tantric Bud -
dhism in the Rebirth of Tibetan Culture. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Dowling, Nancy. 2000. ‘New Light on Early Cam-
bodian Buddhism’, The Journal of the Siam 
Society 88/1–2: 122–155.
Elacqua, Joseph P. 2017. ‘Vajrayāna (Buddhism)’, 
in K.T.S. Sarao and Jeffery D. Long (eds.), En-
cyclopedia of Indian Religions: Buddhism and 
Jainism, pp. 1299–1308. Dordrecht: Springer.
Estève, Julia and Brice Vincent. 2010. ‘L’about 
inscrit du musée national du Cambodge (K. 
943): nouveaux éléments sur le bouddhisme 
tantrique à l’époque angkorienne’, Arts Asia -
tiques 65: 133–158.
Evans, Damian. 2016. ‘Airborne laser scanning as 
a method for exploring long-term socio-eco -
logical dynamics in Cambodia’, Journal of 
Archaeological Science 74: 164–175. 
Finot, Louis. 1904. ‘Les inscriptions’, in Henri Par -
mentier and Louis Finot, Le cirque de Mĩ-Sợn 
(Quang-Nam), pp. 83–173. Hanoi: F.-H. Sch -
neider.. 1934. ‘Manuscripts sanskrits de sādhana’s  
retrouvés en Chine’, Journal Asiatique 225: 1–85.
Goble, Geoffrey. 2016. ‘The Politics of Esoteric 
Buddhism: Amoghavajra and the Tang State’, 
in Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in Me -
diaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons, pp. 123–139. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.
Golzio, Karl-Heinz (ed.). 2004. Inscriptions of 
Campā based on the editions and translations of 
Abel Bergaigne, Étienne Aymonier, Louis Finot, 
Édouard Huber and other French scholars and 
of the work of R.C. Majumdar. Aachen: Shaker 
Verlag.
Gray, David B. 2006. ‘Skull Imagery and Skull 
Magic in the Yoginī Tantras’, Pacific World: 
Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies,  3rd 
series, 8: 21–39.
. 2007. The Cakrasaṃvara Tantra (The Dis-
course of Śri Heruka): Study and Annotated 
Translation. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. ‘Inscriptions of Sumatra 
III. The Padang Lawas corpus studied along 
with inscriptions from Sorik Merapi (North 
Sumatra) and from Muara Takus (Riau)’, in 
Daniel Perret (ed.), History of Padang Lawas 
II. Societies of Padang Lawas (mid-9th–13th 
century CE), pp. 211–237. Paris: Association 
Archipel .
Grünwedel, Albert. 1900. Mythologie des Bud -
dhismus in Tibet und der Mongolei. Leipzig: 
Brockhaus.
Hall, Kenneth R. 1996. ‘Ritual Networks and Royal 
Power in Majapahit Java’, Archipel 52/1: 95–118.
Hunter, Thomas M. 2007. ‘The Body of the King: 
Reappraising Singhasari Period Syncretism’, 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 38/1: 27–53. 
Ishizawa, Yoshiaki and Masako Marui. 2002. ‘La 
découverte de 274 sculptures et d’un caitya 
bouddhique lors des campagnes de fouilles 
de 2000 et 2001 au temple de Banteay Kdei à 
Angkor’, Arts Asiatiques 57: 206–218.
Jacques, Claude. 1995. Études épigraphiques sur 
le pays cham, de Louis Finot, Edouard Huber, 
George Cœdès et Paul Mus réunies par Claude 
Jacques. Paris: Réimpression de l’École fran -
çaise d’Extrême-Orient N°7.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   161 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 166] ---
Peter Sharrock162
. 2015. ‘The History and Inscriptions’, in 
Peter D. Sharrock (ed.), Banteay Chhmar: Gar -
rison-temple of the Khmer Empire, pp. 135–150. 
Bangkok: River Books.
. 2016a. ‘De la fragilité de notre science his-
torique: la stèle K. 1297’. Unpublished paper 
given at the École française d’Extrême-Orient, 
Paris. 
. 2016b. ‘K. 1297 Face A. Maṅgala’. Unpub-
lished paper.
Kozok, Uli and Eric van Reijn. 2010. ‘Ādityawarman: 
Three inscriptions of the Sumatran “king of 
all supreme kings”’, Indonesia and the Malay 
World 38: 135–158.
Laufer, Berthold. 1922. Milaraspa, Tibetische Texte. 
Hagen and Darmstadt: Folkwang Verlag.
Lehnert, Martin. 2012. ‘Tantric Threads between 
India and China’, in Ann Heirman and Stephan 
Peter Bumbacher (eds.), The Spread of Bud-
dhism, pp. 247–276. Leiden: Brill. 
Linrothe, Rob. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: Wrath-
ful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan Esoteric Bud-
dhist Art. London: Serindia.
Lobo, Wibke. 1997. ‘L’image de Hevajra et le 
bouddhisme tantrique’, in Helen Jessup and 
Thierry Zéphir (eds.), Angkor et dix siècles d’art 
khmer, pp. 70–78. Paris: Réunion des musées 
nationaux.
Lokesh Chandra (in collaboration with Sudarshana 
Devi Singhal). 1995. ‘The Jaka Dolog inscription 
of King K ṛtanagara’, in Lokesh Chandra (ed.), 
Cultural Horizons of India, Vol. 4, pp. 148–166. 
New Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture/Aditya Prakashan. 
Lokesh Chandra and Sudarshana Devi Singhal. 
1995. ‘The Buddhist bronzes of Surocolo’, in 
Lokesh Chandra (ed.), Cultural Horizons of 
India, Vol. 4, pp. 121–147. New Delhi: Inter -
national Academy of Indian Culture/Aditya 
Prakashan.
Lowman, Ian. 2016. ‘The Stele K. 1297’. Unpub -
lished paper containing translation excerpts 
and exegesis of this inscription dated Feb. 17, 
2016. 
Mallmann, Marie-Thérèse de. 1986. Introduction à 
l’iconographie du Tântrisme bouddhique.  Paris: 
Librairie d’Amérique et d’Orient.Maxwell, T.S. 2007. ‘Religion at the time of 
Jayavarman VII’, in Joyce Clark (ed.), Bayon: 
New Perspectives, pp. 72–135. Bangkok: River 
Books.
Moens, J.L. 1924. ‘Het Boeddhisme op Java en 
Sumatra in zijn laatste bloeiperiode’, Tijdschrift 
van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten 
en Wetenschappen 64: 521–579.
Monier-Williams, M. 1899. Sanskrit-English Dic-
tionary. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Munoz, Paul Michel. 2006. Early Kingdoms of the 
Indonesian Archipelago and the Malay Penin-
sula. Singapore: Editions Didier Millet. 
Nihom, Max. 1986. ‘The Identification and Origi-
nal Site of a Cult Statue on East Java: The Jaka 
Dolog’, Journal of the American Oriental Society 
106/3: 485–501. 
O’Brien, Kate. 2008. Sutasoma: The ancient tale 
of a Buddha-Prince from 14th century Java by 
the poet Mpu Tantular. Bangkok: Orchid Press.
Orlando, Raffaello. 1981. A study of Chinese docu-
ments concerning the life of the Tantric Buddhist 
patriarch Amoghavajra (A.D. 705–774). PhD 
thesis, Princeton University.
Orzech, Charles D. 1998. Politics and transcendent 
wisdom: The scripture for humane kings in the 
creation of Chinese Buddhism. University Park: 
Pennsylvania State University Press.
Phương, Tran Ky. 2018. ‘Object 76. Part II’, in Trần 
Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn hắng, and Peter D. Shar-
rock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces of 
the Ðà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture, pp. 
247–249. Bangkok: River Books.
Pott, Philipp H. 1966. Yoga and Yantra: Their 
Interrelation and their Significance for Indian 
Archaeology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Priest, Alan. 1937. ‘A collection of Cambodian 
sculpture’, Bulletin of the Metropolitan Museum 
of Art 9: 84–88.
Reichle, Natasha. 2007. Violence and Serenity: Late 
Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2008. The Origins of Yoga and 
Tantra: Indic Religions to the Thirteenth Century. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2003–2004. ‘The Śaiva Religion 
among the Khmers (Part I)’, Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 90–91: 349–462. 
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   162 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 167] ---
Heruka-Maṇḍalas across Maritime Asia163
. 2009. ‘The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dom-
inance of Śaivism during the Early Medieval 
Period’, in Shingo Einoo (ed.), Genesis and 
Development of Tantrism, pp. 41–350. Tokyo: 
Institute of Oriental Culture, University of 
Tokyo Special Series 23.
Schnitger, F.M. 1937. The Archaeology of Hindoo 
Sumatra. Leiden: Brill.
Schoterman, Jan. 2016. ‘Traces of Indonesian 
Influences in Tibet’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), Es-
oteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 113–122. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute. 
[English translation of Indonesische Sporen in 
Tibet. Leiden: Brill, 1986]
Schweyer, Anne-Valérie. 2018. ‘Buddhism in 
Campā’, in Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn hắng, 
and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: 
Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cam 
Sculpture, pp. 71–78. Bangkok: River Books.
Sharrock, Peter. 2006. The Buddhist pantheon of the 
Bàyon of Angkor: An historical and art histor-
ical reconstruction of the Bàyon temple and its 
religious and political roots. PhD thesis, SOAS.
. 2007. ‘The Mystery of the Face Towers’, in 
Joyce Clark (ed.), Bayon: New Perspectives,  
pp. 232–281. Bangkok: River Books.
. 2009. ‘Garuḍa, Vajrapāṇi and Religious 
Change in Jayavarman VII’s Angkor’, Journal 
of Southeast Asian Studies 40/1: 111–151.
. 2012. ‘Kīrtipaṇḍita and the Tantras’, Udaya: 
Journal of Khmer Studies 10: 203–237.
. 2013. ‘The yoginīs of the Bayon’, in István 
Keul (ed.), ‘ Yoginī ’ in South Asia: Interdiscipli -
nary Approaches, pp. 117–129. London: Rout -
ledge.  
. 2018. ‘Cam-Khmer interactions 1113–1220 
CE’, in Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn hắng, and 
Peter D. Sharrock (eds), Vibrancy in Stone: 
Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cam 
Sculpture, pp. 111–119.  Bangkok: River Books.
Sharrock, Peter and Claude Jacques. 2017. ‘The 
Grief of Kings Is the Suffering of their Sub -
jects: A Cambodian King’s Twelfth-Century 
Network of Hospitals’, in C. Pierce Salguero 
(ed.), Buddhism and Medicine: An Anthology 
of Premodern Sources, pp. 226–232. New York: 
Columbia University Press. Snellgrove, David L. 1959. The Hevajra Tantra: 
A Critical Study. London: Oxford University 
Press.
. 1987 [revised 2004]. Indo-Tibetan Bud -
dhism: Indian Buddhists and Their Tibetan 
Successors. Bangkok: Orchid Press.
. 1988. ‘Categories of Buddhist Tantras’, in 
G. Gnoli and L. Lanciotti (eds.), Orientalia 
Josephi Tucci Memoriae. Seria Orientali Roma 
56/3: 1353–1384.
. 2001. Khmer civilization and Angkor. 
Bangkok: Orchid Press.
Southworth, William A. 2014a. ‘The Alteration and 
Destruction of Buddhist Images at Angkor’, 
in Julia A.B. Hegewald (ed.), In the Shadow of 
the Golden Age: Art and Identity in Asia from 
Gandhara to the Modern Age, pp. 197–225. 
Berlin: EB-Verlag. 
Sundberg, Jeffrey and Rolf Giebel. 2011. ‘The life of 
the Tang court monk Vajrabodhi as chronicled 
by Lü Xiang 呂向 : South Indian and Śrī Laṅkān 
antecedents to the arrival of the Buddhist Va-
jrayāna in 8th century Java and China’, Pacific 
World, Third Series, 13 (Fall): 129–222.
Szántó, Péter-Dániel and Arlo Griffiths. 2015.  
‘Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara’, in  
Brill’s Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, vol. 1, 
Literature and Languages, pp. 367–372. Leiden: 
Brill.
Takakusu, J. 1896. A Record of the Buddhist Religion 
as Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago 
(A.D. 671–695). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2018. An Illustrated History of the 
Mandala: From its Genesis to the Kālacakratan -
tra. Boston: Wisdom publications.
Thapar, Romila. 1961. Asoka and the Decline of 
the Mauryas. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tsuda, Shinichi. 1974. The Saṃvarodaya-tantra: 
Selected Chapters. PhD thesis, Australian Na-
tional University.
Vickery, Michael. 2006. ‘Bayon: New Perspec -
tives Reconsidered’, Udaya: Journal of Khmer 
Studies 7: 101–173.
Whitmore, John K. 2018. ‘Nagara Campa and the 
Vijaya turn’, in Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn hắng, 
and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: 
Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cam 
Sculpture, pp. 31–36. Bangkok: River Books.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   163 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 168] ---
Peter Sharrock164
Willemen, C. 1983. The Chinese Hevajratantra: 
The Scriptural Text of the Ritual of the Great 
King of the Teaching, the Adamantine One 
with Great Compassion and Knowledge of the 
Void. Leuven: Peeters. [repr. 2004, New Delhi: 
Motilal Barnarsidass]
Woodward, Hiram H. 1981. ‘Tantric Buddhism at 
Angkor Thom’, Ars Orientalis 12: 57–71.
. 2003. The Art and Architecture of Thailand 
from Prehistoric Times through the Thirteenth 
Century. Leiden: Brill.. 2004. ‘Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia 
in the Light of Recent Scholarship’, Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies 35/2: 329–354.
. 2011. ‘Cambodian Images of Bhaiṣajyagu-
ru’, in Emma C. Bunker and Douglas Latchford 
(eds.), Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations of 
the Past. Chicago: Art Media Resources.
. 2015. ‘Aspects of Buddhism in Tenth-Cen -
tury Cambodia’, in D. Christian Lammerts (ed.), 
Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early 
Modern Southeast Asia, pp. 218–260. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
04_CreSouthV1_4P_22Jan22.indd   164 28/1/22   5:38 PM

--- [Page 169] ---
Chapter 5
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in  
Jayavarman VII’s Angkor
Jinah Kim
introduction
This chapter explores the religious and 
political significance of the goddess Pra -
jñāpāramitā during Jayavarman VII’s 
reign (c. 1181 –12
20) from trans-regional com-
parative perspectives. The unique iconography of 
Angkorian Prajñāpāramitā helps to illustrate her 
relationship with other Mahāyāna cultic deities 
such as Avalokiteśvara and Tārā in known textual 
sources. Here, it is important to underscore that 
Khmer examples are not ‘outcasts’ in the icono -
graphic genealogy of the goddess Prajñāpāramit ā, 
but innovative yet politically sensitive creations 
that can help us understand the historical process 
behind the formation of a religious iconogra -
phy. While a recent study on Prajñāpāramitā by 
Multzer o’Naghten (2016 ) puts a due emphasis 
on the Mahāyāna characteristics of the goddess 
Prajñāpāramitā, her importance in the Esoteric 
Buddhist tenets demands reconsideration.1 Ex-
ploring Prajñāpāramitā through a trans-regional 
lens supports the importance of Esoteric Buddhism 
in Jayavarman VII’s state operation that scholars 
like Hiram W. Woodward (1981 , 2004 ) and Peter 
1. My own study of Sanskrit manuscripts of the 
Prajñāpāramit ā in mediaeval South Asia and recent studies 
on the Prajñāpāramit ā in tantric Buddhist contexts like 
Seton (2015, 2017) inform my suggestion to consider 
Prajñāpāramit ā’s importance in the Esoteric Buddhist 
context. It also echoes Philip Green’s recent proposal (2014) 
to reevaluate the quintessential Mahāyāna Bodhisattva 
Avalokiteśvara within an ‘emerging tantric context 
beginning around the tenth century’ in Cambodia instead 
of confining the bodhisattva to ‘the overgeneralized category 
of Mahāyāna Buddhism’. Sharrock (2009 , 2012 , 2013 ) have brought to light. 
It also helps to locate Angkor in the trans-regional 
network of Esoteric Buddhism of the 12th–13 th 
centuries across South and Southeast Asia, from 
Alchi in the Western Himalayas to Java. 
Prajñāpāramitā is the title of the epony -
mous text of Mahāyāna Buddhism, and the Pra -
jñāpāramitā related texts have been extensively 
examined in the Buddhological studies.2 With 
more studies on the early manuscript corpus from 
Gandh āra underway, a refined picture of the early 
historical development of the Prajñāpāramit ā as 
a Mahāyāna text has emerged (Falk and Karashi-
ma 2013; Harrison and Hartmann 2014; Harri -
son 2018). It remains unclear when the Goddess 
Prajñāpāramitā, the female personification of the 
famed text, and her worship appeared in the histor-
ical horizon. It seems to have been some centuries 
after the suggested date of the text’s formulation 
at the beginning of the Common Era.3 The earliest 
surviving identifiable image of Prajñāpāramitā may 
be a standing bronze statue of a two-armed goddess 
holding a manuscript in her left hand (von Hinüber  
 
2. They are too numerous to list here. See Conze (1978) 
for the list of Edward Conze’s publication on the Pra -
jñāpāramit ā. 
3. A Chinese pilgrim Faxian’s (ca. 377–422 CE) report 
of seeing Prajñāpāramit ā in wor ship is taken as evidence 
of the worship of the goddess in practice in the early 5th 
century. However, Faxian’s text does not specify that it was 
an image of the goddess. The object of devotion here may 
well have been a manuscript. See Kim 2013: 30–31. Also 
discussed in Shaw 2006, fn. 31.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   167 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 170] ---
Jinah Kim168
2007) (Fig. 5.10).4 Prajñāpāramitā and her worship 
was an important aspect of Pāla Buddhism in India 
between the 9 th and 12 th centuries (Kinnard 1999 ; 
Kim 2013 ). As an embodiment of a foundation -
al Mahāyāna Buddhist text and the wisdom ex-
pounded therein, the goddess Prajñāpāramitā is 
frequently treated as a quintessential Mahāyāna 
goddess (Conze 1948 , 1949 –50, 1951 ; Shaw 2006 ). 
Thus, Hedwige Multzer o’Naghten (2016 ) takes 
the appearance of the goddess Prajñāpāramitā as 
a sole Buddhist female deity in Angkor as suggest-
ing ‘doctrinal trends of Mahāyāna Buddhism’. We 
should not forget, however, the importance of the 
Prajñāpāramitā in Indian Esoteric Buddhism—that, 
too, in all of its multivalency: as a text, transcend-
ent insight, mother of all Buddhas, a manuscript, 
a goddess, and an image (Seton 2015 , 2017 ; Kim 
2013 , 2021 ). 
It is this new perspective on the Prajñāpāramitā 
in the mediaeval Indic context that this study 
brings to bear on the discussion of the Angko -
rian Prajñāpāramitā. In particular, it contends 
that Prajñāpāramitā’s Esoteric Buddhist connec -
tion provides further circumstantial evidence to 
demonstrate the importance of Esoteric/tantric 
Buddhism in Jayavarman VII’s Angkor that schol-
ars like Woodward and Sharrock among others 
have demonstrated (Woodward 1981 , 2004 ; Lobo 
1997 ; Sharrock 2006 , 2007 ; Estève and Vincent 
2010 ). The goddess Prajñāpāramitā’s Esoteric Bud-
dhist connection has been suggested in previous 
scholarship, but the connection has been simply 
assumed on the basis of feminine gender, taking the 
gender and the femininity in a visual representa -
tion as signalling ‘a sexual and hence Tantric over-
tone’ (Huntington and Bangdel 2003 : 124). The 
importance of the Prajñāpāramitā teaching in the 
development of Buddhist Tantras has long been 
acknowledged (Conze 1956 ; Wayman 1977 ; Snell-
grove 1987 ; Seton 2015 ; Kim 2013 ). At least one 
recension of the Prajñāpāramitā text, the Adhy- 
ardhaśatik ā Prajñāpāramitā (Prajñāpāramitā 
in 150 verses) is clearly associated with Esoteric 
Buddhist circles (Linrothe 1999 ; Davidson 2002 ; 
Woodward 2015 ; Bianchini 2020 ). As we shall see, 
the Aṣṭasāhasrik ā Prajñāpāramit ā (Perfection of 
4. Oskar von Hinüber (2007) dates this image to the  
early 7th century during the reign of the Palola Ṣāhi King 
Vajrādityanandin. Wisdom in eight thousand verses, henceforth AsP), 
one of the oldest recensions, and the central piece 
of the Mahāyāna Buddhist canon, holds an im -
portant key to locate Angkorian Prajñāpāramit ā’s 
Esoteric Buddhist connection in the trans-regional 
Esoteric Buddhist network. 
At the outset, it should be noted that my in-
sistence on comparative trans-regional analysis of 
iconographic forms does not mean a return to a co -
lonial-era generated centre-periphery diffusionist 
model. A comparative analysis of forms based on 
close looking and sustained physical observation of 
objects can help explore little recognized features 
of local artistic traditions. By emphasizing formal 
analysis, I am not arguing for an alliance with 
universalist approaches like that taken by André 
Malraux in Le musée imaginaire and Les voix du 
silence. Rather, it is to underscore local aesthetics 
and visual strategies and their trans-regional values 
to understand them in a larger network without 
invoking a diffusionist model (e.g. Acri 2016 ). 
jayavarman vii’s buddhist family 
triad: avalokiteśvara-buddha-
prajñāp āramit ā 
In the famous stele of Ta Prohm, the son of Jayavar -
man VII, Śrī Sūryakum āra, recorded that Jayavar-
man VII had installed an image of his mother, Śrī 
Jayarājac ūḍāmaṇī that was the image of the mother 
of Jinas. From this phrase, the mother of Jina, or 
jinamātṛ in this Sanskrit inscription, scholars have 
suggested that the central shrine of Ta Prohm was 
dedicated to the mother of Jayavarman VII in the 
form of Prajñāpāramitā. No sculpture that could 
be identified as this very image mentioned in the 
inscription has been found in situ. The name 
‘Prajñāpāramitā’ appears often in the discussion 
of Buddhist inscriptions of Angkor, and it is a fa-
miliar name assigned to a few images of female 
deities in the Buddhist context of the Angkor 
period in art historical discussions. Yet, the term 
‘Prajñāpāramitā’ is not used in the Ta Prohm stele 
or in any other known royal inscriptions from the 
Jayavarman VII’s reign, such as the Preah Khan 
stele inscription. Instead, her epithets as the 
mother of the Buddhas are used: i.e. ‘jinamātṛ’ and 
‘jinanāṃ jananῑ’ at Ta Prohm, and ‘jinanāṃ jananῑ’ 
at Preah Khan (Cœdès 1906 , stanzas v, xxxvi; 1941 , 
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   168 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 171] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor169
stanza v). After almost two centuries of lacunae in 
inscriptional evidence, the Ta Prohm stele, which 
is dated 1186  CE, drops the name ‘Prajñāpāramitā’, 
which was commonly used in earlier 10 th-centu-
ry inscriptions, and uses only her epithets as the 
mother of the Buddhas. This usage of the epithets 
over the actual name seems to have been Jayavar-
man VII’s deliberate political choice, though his 
motivation remains unclear. 
Today, Ta Prohm is well known for its image 
of an ancient temple taken over by the tropical 
forest, a battleground between nature and culture, 
through the tales of tourists and their romantic 
photos of ruins.5 The importance of Ta Prohm as 
the temple dedicated to the mother of the Buddha, 
or Prajñāpāramitā, first came to scholarly attention 
when George Cœdès put forth his argument about 
the cult of buddharāja by considering the trinity of 
Lokeśvara-Buddha-Prajñāpāramitā as being real-
ized in the three state temples of Jayavarman VII, 
Preah Khan, Bayon, and Ta Prohm in his analysis 
of the Preah Khan stele (Cœdès 1941 , 1989 ). The 
stele of Preah Khan reports that Jayavarman VII 
consecrated (opened the eyes of) the central statue 
of Lokeśvara named Jayavarmeśvara that was an 
image of his father (pit ṛmūrti). The contents of 
the inscriptions from Ta Prohm and Preah Khan 
are similar, and the first thirty-six lines of ‘Face 
A’ of the Ta Prohm stele are verbatim repeated in 
the Preah Khan stele, also on ‘Face A’. The two 
steles are almost identical in appearance: along 
with similar arrangements of text in two columns, 
both feature a moulded base, stylized lotus flower 
decoration on the top, and are almost identical in 
size (Ta Prohm: 60 cm by 200 cm; Preah Khan: 58  
cm by 185  cm). The similarity between the two in-
scriptions suggests deliberate planning of these two 
temples dedicated to his mother and father. Cœdès 
proposed that the huge Buddha of the Bayon state 
temple found shattered in the central pit of the 
temple must have been the missing Buddha of the 
trinity that reflects the projection of Jayavarman 
VII’s self-image as Buddharāja or the Buddha-king 
born of the mother Prajñāpāramitā and the father 
Lokeśvara. 
5. It is famous as the set for the film ‘Lara Croft: Tomb 
Raid
er’ (2001), directed by Simon West. As observed by Woodward (2015 ), the idea 
of the Avalokiteśvara (Lokeśvara)-Buddha-Pra-
jñāpāramitā (henceforth ABP) trinity seems to 
have been everywhere early in the reign of Jayavar-
man VII. The trinity is invoked at the beginning of 
most royal inscriptions. In addition, a good number 
of images depicting the trinity survive from the 
period, and artistic calibers and common stylistic 
traits evident in these sculptures suggest a concert-
ed royal patronage of this type. One such example 
is the Prei Monte temple bronze sculpture of the 
triad now in the Phnom Penh National Museum, 
datable to Jayavarman VII’s reign based on its style 
and iconography (Fig. 5.1 ). It is a sizeable bronze 
piece nearly half a meter in height (h. 49.5  cm, w. 
41.5 cm, d. 16  cm). Each deity and the pedestal 
were cast separately and assembled together.6 The 
6. On the material composition and technique of met -
allurgy, see Bougarit et al. (2003) and Vincent, Bourgarit 
and Jett (2012). A recent study (Polkinghorne et al. 2014) Fig. 5.1: Buddhist Triad (Lokeśvara-Buddha-Prajñāpāramitā), found at Roluos, Siem Reap, 
Cambodia, ca. late 12th–early 13th century. Gilded 
bronze. H: 49.5 cm. National Museum, Phnom Penh, 
Ga2424.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   169 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 172] ---
Jinah Kim170
Buddha in the centre sits in meditation on a lotus 
seat installed on a serpent’s coil. The seven-head-
ed serpent’s dramatic hood rises above him in a 
shape that may evoke the Bodhi tree and its leaves 
under which the Buddha attained enlightenment. 
Lokeśvara stands firmly with his robust legs and 
holds a rosary, a book, a lotus, and a flask in his 
four hands. Amitābha in front of his matted hair is 
visually pronounced. Prajñāpāramitā, or the female 
deity who holds a lotus bud in her left hand and 
a book in her right, stands on the left side of the 
Buddha. All three of them feature downcast eyes 
and thick lips with gentle smiles, one of the distinct 
stylistic features of Jayavarman VII’s sculptural 
workshops. They collectively exude serenity. In its 
original state, this object would have been entirely 
gilded (i.e. fire gild on unleaded copper alloy, see 
Vincent, Bourgarit and Jett 2012 : 140), suggesting 
splendour and import assigned to such a piece. 
precedents of the abp triad 
The ABP triad became one of the most prominent 
types of images produced and installed in Angkor 
by the end of the 12 th century, perhaps because of 
Jayavarman VII’s propagandic strategy. The idea of 
the ABP triad, however, was not Jayavarman VII’s 
invention. It was already in circulation in Angkor 
at least two centuries before Jayavarman VII’s time. 
There survives an earlier 10th-century sculptural 
representation of a triad. A stone stele in Honolulu 
shows an interesting triad configuration with the 
same three-some: Avalokiteśvara, Prajñāpāramitā, 
and the Buddha (Fig. 5.2 ). The number of arms 
and the postures held by each figure remain iden-
tical: four-armed Avalokiteśvara, two-armed Pra -
jñāpāramitā, both standing, and Buddha seated in 
meditation. The composition of the triad differs 
considerably from Jayavarman VII’s ABP triad. In 
the Honolulu stele, the Buddha sits above a be -
jewelled pillar that rises in between Avalokiteśvara 
and Prajñāpāramitā, as if to articulate the Esoteric 
Buddhist conception of enlightenment rising from 
the union between compassion (Avalokiteśvara) 
and wisdom (Prajñāpāramitā). The emphasis here 
explores the importance of bronze casting at Angkor with 
an archaeological identification of a bronze casting work -
shop within the central area of Angkor Thom. is the path signalled by the two standing figures, 
Avalokiteśvara and Prajñāpāramitā, the importance 
of which in 10 th-century Angkorian Buddhism are 
well attested in art historical and epigraphic evi -
dence.7 In comparison, the composition of Jayavar -
7. Nancy Dowling (1996) argues for the triratna  (thre e 
jewels: Buddha-Dharma-Sangha; B-P-A respectively) in -
terpretation of the stele against Woodward (1981)’s Esoteric 
Buddhist argument based on the Mahāvairocanas ūtra. 
While Dowling’s effort to localize the interpretation based 
on epigraphic sources is laudable, perhaps her insistence on Mahāyāna interpretation is too generic and inadvert -
ently erases the dynamism of Angkorian Buddhism that 
paralleled rapidly developing Esoteric Buddhist methods 
and means being incorporated into Buddhist practices 
elsewhere. Also, see Hiram Woodward (2007, 2015) and 
Philip Green (2014) for the importance of the Kāraṇḍa-  
vyūhasūtra , which puts Avalokiteśvara in the central po -
sition in Angkorian Buddhism. Fig. 5.2: Stele with Buddha, Lokeśvara and Prajñāpāramitā, c. 10th century. Bakheng style. 
Cambodia. Pinkish sandstone. Collection of the 
Honolulu Museum of Art. Gift of John Young, 1991 
(6691.1). Photo courtesy of the Honolulu Museum  
of Art.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   170 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 173] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor171
man VII’s ABP triad emphasizes the fruit, the com-
pleted state, the Buddhahood that was harnessed in 
conceptualizing Jayavarman VII’s kingship. 
As a precedent to Jayavarman VII’s triad, it is 
important to recognize that the Honolulu stele 
represents a unique Khmer artistic interpretation 
of the importance of compassion and wisdom in 
Buddhist practices. Such a configuration is rarely 
seen in Buddhist art of India where a triad was 
almost always composed of male members, i.e. 
Buddha with two male bodhisattvas or attend -
ants. The conception of the ABP triad appears 
in Angkorian epigraphic sources from the 10th 
century onwards, but this formulation remains 
unidentified in known contemporary textual 
sources as Woodward (2015: 231) points out.8 A 
rare example depicting male and female bodhisat-
tvas as a couple with the Buddha rising above in 
8. Woodward characterizes the triad of ABP as an issue 
that ‘
cannot be easily resolved’.Fig. 5.3: Avalokiteśvara-Tārā with Buddha in earth-
touching gesture, bronze, Kurkihar, Bihar, India, c.  
late 9th–10th century. Patna Museum, India. Photo  
© Jinah Kim. 
the middle survives among the hordes of bronzes 
found at Kurkihar, an important Buddhist site in 
Bihar that seems to have catered to monks and 
pilgrims from South India, like Kañci and Malaya 
country (malayadeśa) (Pal 1988; Kim 2013: 232; 
Bautze-Picron 2015: 17). A bronze sculpture now 
housed in the Patna Museum (Acc No. 9642, h: 15.5 
cm) renders Avalokiteśvara and Tārā both seated 
while displaying varadamudr ā in their right hands 
and holding their respective lotuses, padma and 
utpala, in their left hands, in harmony (Fig. 5.3).9 
The two deities are framed by a single throne-back 
with double openings. This framing piece was cast 
separately and soldered behind their heads. On 
this framing structure, rising in between them on 
a lotus seat sits Buddha in earth-touching gesture 
(bhūmisparśamudr ā), signalling the epitome of en-
lightenment. A halo with flaming outer rim sur -
rounds this Buddha. A bejewelled umbrella above 
him marks the peak of the sculpture while bodhi 
leaves drape like tendrils on either side. Two stupas 
on double-lotus seats are carved on the flat bar 
across the throne back, as if doubly confirming the 
Buddhist identity of the iconography. The image 
bears the so-called ‘Buddhist creed (ye dharma 
hetu…)’ inscribed on the back of the throne and a 
now abraded donor inscription on the front of the 
pedestal (Akhtar 2001 : 193). The Buddha on a lotus 
seat is positioned on top of a vertical bar in between 
the couple, displaying a similar composition to the 
Honolulu stele. The relatively smaller size of the 
Buddha in comparison to the couple below is also 
a shared feature. The Kurkihar bronze may date to 
the 10 th century.10
There is no direct connection between the 
Kurkihar bronze and the Angkorian stele in Hon-
olulu, except for tenuous formal ones. Yet, the 
unique Cambodian formulation begs us to look at 
a group of Indian sculptures with a fresh perspec-
tive. There survives a small, somewhat enigmat-
ic corpus of sculptures in India that represent a 
similar triadic formulation of male-female couple 
with a transcendental figure rising above in the 
9. Bautze-Picron 2015: B40.
10. The scul
ptural quality is relatively crude in compari -
son to better finished and defined bronze sculptures from 
the Kurkihar hoard of the 9th century. 
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   171 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 174] ---
Jinah Kim172
centre. Most of these images are identified in a Jain 
context, which rarely finds counterparts outside the 
South Asian subcontinent. They are often described 
as a ‘family group’. In a stone stele from northern 
India now in the Los Angeles County Museum of 
Art (M.77.49), for example, two large figures, male 
and female, sit in the centre with a tree rising above 
them on top of which sits a meditating Jina (Fig. 
5.4). The identity of the couple remains unresolved 
between ‘parents of the Jina’, and a yakṣa-yakṣῑ 
couple who are the protective attendants (Shah 
1987: 47–52). 
The triangular formulation with a couple and 
their ‘offspring’ in the centre above them seems 
to have become popular in Jain circles during the 
10th century as seen in the bronze image (copper 
alloy) from eastern Maharashtra (Rajnapur Khin- 
kini), now in the Nagpur Central Museum (Fig. 5.5). Fig. 5.4: A Jain Family Group, Uttar Pradesh, India, c. 
550–600 CE. Cream-coloured sandstone, 50.8 × 28.57 
× 10.79 cm. Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Gift 
of Mr and Mrs Harry Lenart, M.77.49.Fig. 5.5: Yak ṣa coup
le, c. 10th century. Rajnapur 
Khinkini, Maharashtra. H: 23.2 cm. Nagpur Central 
Museum, CMN/C/148/10. Image: Regents of the 
University of Michigan, Department of the History of 
Art, Visual Resources Collections.
According to Lisa Owen (2013 ), a triadic formula-
tion with Jain yakṣa (Kubera) and Jain yakṣῑ (often 
called Ambikā) flanking the solitary Jina Tīrthaṅ-
kara is found in later additions (‘intrusive panels’) 
to the Jain caves at Ellora, mostly carved during the 
mid-10 th century.11 The significance of this icono-
graphic formulation merits further investigation. 
As a parallel, the Avalokiteśvara-Prajñāpāramitā 
couple in the Honolulu stele suggest an alternate 
meaning of the yak ṣa-yak ṣī couple in Jain exam-
ples, not only as the guardians of Jain teaching 
11. Owen (2013: 114–115) considers these additions as sig -
nalling the continued ‘growth and development of Jain 
iconography’.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   172 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 175] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor173
(śāsanadevatās) but also as an important conduit 
for practitioners in their pursuit of the higher state 
of being. At least in the Buddhist context, it may 
relate to the circulation of certain Tantras that ar-
ticulate the spiritual relationship through familial 
terms (kula), especially those that introduce the 
language of the union of gendered principles in the 
spiritual quest, with prajñ ā identified as the female 
force, as in the Guhyasam āja (Wayman 1973 : 6–11 ; 
Linrothe 1999 : 147 , 225 ). 
Going back to the political significance of 
Jayavarman VII’s ABP triad, inscriptional evidence 
also suggests a modified formulation of the rela-
tionship among the trinity during Jayavarman VII’s 
time. For example, both Ta Prohm and Preah Khan 
steles invoke Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha in the 
first three stanzas before invoking Lokeśvara and 
Prajñāpāramitā. This is a big change from the late 
10th-century inscriptions where Prajñāpāramitā 
and Lokeśvara were invoked in place of Dharma 
and Sangha respectively.12 What is visually insinu-
ated in the Honolulu stele, that is, the conception of 
Lokeśvara and Prajñāpāramitā as a couple bearing 
the Buddha was fully embraced and appropriated 
for political ends during Jayavarman VII’s reign. 
In other words, the ABP triad prepared during 
Jayavarman VII’s reign is no longer a representa-
tion of triratna.13 Rather, as a visual representation 
of the path to the Buddhahood, the emphasis is 
in the nuclear family relationship, father-moth-
er-son with the focus on the son. In the Honolulu 
stele, Prajñāpāramitā and Lokeśvara hold a more 
central position signalled by their firm stance and 
the prominent size in comparison to the Buddha 
who is supported by the post. This Buddha, the 
son of their union, is the protagonist of the triad 
of the late 12 th century in terms of his size and 
presence. It seems that Jayavarman VII appro -
12. For example, the stele of Phnom Banteay Nan invokes 
Buddha, Lokeśvara and Prajñāpāramitā in the first three 
stanzas. IC, VI: 202–206. The inscription of Thma Puok 
also invokes Buddha, Prajñāpāramitā and Lokeśvara in 
the first three stanzas. IC, III: 66–67.
13. It is not
eworthy that a slightly modified triad of ‘Pra -
jñāpāramitā-Buddha (Śākyamuni)-Ṣaḍākṣari Lokeśvara’ 
serves as an important visual representation of triratna  
in post-16th century Nepal. See Woodward 2007, fn. 51; 
Kim 2019: 106. priated the concept of the earlier triad and that 
of Prajñāpāramitā as the mother of Buddhas, as 
evidenced by the exclusive use of her epithet of 
‘Buddha-mother’. Her ‘motherly’ identity seems 
to have nearly eclipsed her doctrinal identity as 
the personification of the teaching (dharma) in 
Jayavarman VII’s inscriptions at Ta Phrom and 
Preah Khan. 
development of the prajñāpāramit ā 
iconography 
Surviving art historical records suggest images 
of the goddess Prajñāpāramitā came into exist -
ence centuries after the initial formulation of the 
Prajñāpāramitā texts.14 When, how, or why this 
transformation happened remains an art historical 
puzzle. The iconography of Prajñāpāramitā was 
fluid and experimental in its early stage of devel-
opment during the 7 th through the 9 th centuries 
in South Asia. The most common attribute that 
leads modern scholars to identify a female deity as 
Prajñāpāramitā is a book; not a codex, but a pothi  
format manuscript.15 A pothi manuscript was often 
made with palm-leaf or birch bark cut to uniform 
size, and depicted as a narrow rectangular bar in 
visual representations. A book as an iconographic 
attribute signals wisdom (prajñ ā) or knowledge 
(vidyā) in ancient and mediaeval South Asian art. 
Two main modes of presentation of this attrib-
ute exist in the Prajñāpāramit ā iconography: in one, 
the book is held in the hand of the goddess as seen 
in Angkorian examples, and in the other, the book 
is placed above an utpala (water-lily, nymphea) 
that she holds. The latter strategy appears at Ellora 
in India where we find early surviving examples of 
Buddhist goddesses that may signal changing doc-
trinal and ritual needs of Mahāyāna and emerging 
14. Faxian’s (337–c.422) report of seeing Prajñāpāramitā 
in worship is often taken as evidence of the existence of the 
image of the goddess Prajñāpāramitā in the 4th century as 
recently cited by Multzer o’Naghten (2016), but the passage 
in question does not necessarily mean there was an image 
of the goddess (Kim 2013: 31).
15. Pothi  m
eans book in Hindi, and especially refers to a 
manuscript in the traditional ‘Indic’ format as described. 
It is used here for convenience of reference. 
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   173 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 176] ---
Jinah Kim174
Esoteric Buddhist tenets.16 What may be identi -
fied as an early rendition of Prajñāpāramit ā with a 
book on lotus is carved outside Cave 10, standing 
side by side with Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara (Fig. 
5.6). The robust standing female deity is as tall as 
Avalokiteśvara, and their relationship is that of 
equal partners. The status of female deities that 
appear in intrusive panels at Ellora is not subor-
dinate to their male counterparts. For example, 
another unusual arrangement in Cave 3 A at Ellora 
shows a female deity holding a fully blown lotus 
(i.e. padma, perhaps representing an early form 
of the quintessential Buddhist Goddess, Tār ā 
before the iconographic codification, or Bhṛkuṭῑ, 
16. Ellora is where Linrothe (1999) finds early visual 
records signalling ‘Phase One’ Esoteric Buddhism. Along 
with the krodha-vighnāntaka  imagery that Linrothe uses 
to measure the stages of historical development of Esoteric 
Buddhism, images of goddesses can be another yardstick 
that can help investigate the ritual and material history of 
Indian Esoteric Buddhism. if the object in her right hand is a rosary and if her 
damaged diadem held a stūpa) standing tall next to 
a standing Buddha (Fig. 5.7 ).17 Looking eastwards 
to the next stage of iconographic development, we 
note that the book on top of an utpala became a 
ubiquitous marker of the Wisdom related deities 
in Pāla Buddhist art, including Mañjuśrῑ, Cund ā, 
and Prajñāpāramit ā. A number of examples from 
Magadhan sites depict the goddess Prajñāpāramit ā 
holding an utpala with a book on top as seen in a 
bronze sculpture from N āland ā (Fig. 5.8 ). The book 
on a lotus became established as a visual code to 
signal wisdom in Buddhist iconography, including 
that of Mañjuśrῑ as bodhisattva of wisdom. In a 
17. The designation of Cave 3A follows Malandra’s (1993: 
39). A
lthough the image appears in Cave 4 iconographic 
plan in her book, it is located in the connecting cell between 
Caves 3 and 4 called Cave 3A. Malandra ( ibid.: 40) describes 
this configuration as ‘carved, but without apparent con -
nection among them, an indication of the disrupted nature 
of these subsidiary areas in the Cave 2 through 4 group.’Fig. 5.6: Prajñāpāramitā and Avalokiteśvara. Intrusive 
panel outside Cave 10 second story balcony area, 
Ellora, ca. 7th century. Photo © Jinah Kim.Fig. 5.7: Tārā or Bhṛkuṭī and Buddha, Cave 3A Ellora, c. 
7th century. Photo © Jinah Kim.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   174 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 177] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor175
Fig. 5.8: Prajñāpāramitā, c. 9th century. Bronze. 
Nāland ā. ASI Si
te Museum, N āland ā. Phot
o © Jinah 
Kim. 
Fig. 5.9: Sarasvatī, c. 10th century. Rajnapur Khinkini, 
Maharashtra. Bronze (copper alloy). 23.2 cm. Nagpur 
Central Museum CMN/C/148/11. Image: Regents of 
the University of Michigan, Department of the History 
of Art, Visual Resources Collections.
way, this feature distinguished Buddhist wisdom 
deities from those of other religious traditions. 
A book held in hand is a more ancient visual 
strategy that was used to signal the connection 
with knowledge, as the earliest surviving image of 
the goddess Sarasvatī found in the Jain context at 
Mathura, India, demonstrates.18 Sarasvatī’s iconog-
raphy consistently depicts a book in the Goddess’ 
hand in mediaeval Jain and Hindu contexts, as seen 
in a circa 10 th-century copper alloy sculpture of 
Sarasvatī found in eastern Maharashtra (Rajnapur 
Khinkini), now in the Nagpur Central Museum 
(CMN/C/148 /11) (Fig. 5.9 ).19 A 7th-century bronze 
18. This is the well-known image in the State Museum in 
Lucknow, Acc. No. J.24. Most recently published in Kim 
2015, fig. 24. 
19. It is int
eresting to note that Jina in meditation floats 
above her, signalling an important connection between 
wisdom and meditation, which, as we will see, is also em -
phasized in Angkorian Prajñāpāramitā images. image of Prajñāpāramit ā from Gilgit, possibly the 
earliest surviving image that can be confirmed as 
the goddess Prajñāpāramit ā through inscription 
also holds a book in her left hand (Fig. 5.10 ).20 In 
Pāla period Buddhist images, this mode is followed 
in some multi-armed images of Prajñāpāramit ā 
and Cund ā, shown as holding a book in one of their 
hands. A two-armed image of Prajñāpāramit ā with 
a book in her hand as seen in Jayavarman VII’s 
ABP triad, however, is rare among Pāla period ex-
amples. A unique stone sculpture found at Nāland ā 
provides us a glimpse into an early formulation 
of the goddess Prajñāpāramit ā’s iconography that 
20. See the discussion of the inscription and the date in 
von Hi
nüber 2007.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   175 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 178] ---
Jinah Kim176
adopted this book-in-hand feature to signal her 
motherly identity as articulated in the text of the 
Aṣṭasāhasrik ā Prajñāpāramit ā [AsP]. 
A circa 8th-century stone sculpture of a goddess 
surrounded by a retinue of male figures (Fig. 5.11 ) 
was found in the southeast corner of site No. 3 at 
Nāland ā during the early years of excavation (Sastri 
1986 : 38). This image has been variously identi -
fied as Koṭiśrῑ, Mahāsarasvatῑ, and Vajraśārad ā 
(Bhattacharyya 1968 : 351; see Asher 1980 : 82–83). 
Here, I would like to suggest that this image is an 
early attempt to capture plastically the image of the 
Prajñāpāramit ā as the ‘mother of bodhisattvas, the 
great beings (māt ā bhagavan bodhisatvānām ma-
hāsatvānām prajñāpāramit ā)’, as sung by Śāripu-
tra in Chapter 
VII of the AsP (Conze 1973 : 135). A benign, two-armed goddess bedecked in jewels and 
ornaments sits on a lotus with her legs crossed at 
the ankle. Surrounding her are four male figures, 
also seated on lotuses that sprout from the same 
mother stalk as the goddess. The four are differenti -
ated in their hair styles and attires, two of them fea -
turing antelope skin around their chests and loftily 
matted hair, similar to those seen in contemporary 
images of Avalokiteśvara and Maitreya. Interest-
ingly, these male figures all hold a book in their 
left hands.21 Given the positioning of her broken 
left arm, it is very likely that the goddess also held 
a book in her left hand like the spiritual ‘sons’ that 
surround her (Asher 1980 : 82). The two snakes (one 
is damaged) that peak out from underneath her 
lotus seat also signals a connection between this 
plump goddess and the Prajñāpāramit ā, especially 
given the oft-cited story of n āgas guarding the Pra-
jñāpāramit ā until Nāg ārjuna rescued it for the hu-
21. The top right corner image is damaged and we cannot 
see the left hand, but it is most likely that this image also 
held a book in his left hand like his brothers. Fig. 5.10: Prajñāpāramitā, c. 7th or 8th century. Gilgit, 
Pakistan. Copper alloy with copper and silver inlay. H: 
41 cm. Private collection. Photo © Christian Luczanits. 
Fig. 5.11: Prajñāpāramitā (?) with four bodhisattvas, 
ca. 8th century. Site No. 3, N āland ā. ASI Si
te Museum, 
Nāland ā. Phot
o © Jinah Kim.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   176 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 179] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor177
mankind.22 This form does not seem to have been a 
successful model for the subsequent development of 
the iconography of Prajñāpāramit ā, perhaps owing 
to the fact that she does not appear so different from 
other goddesses, including contemporary images 
of Saptam ātṛkās (Seven Mothers), like those in 
Ellora’s Hindu caves.23 If this image represents an 
early effort to render the goddess Prajñāpāramit ā 
as the mother to all bodhisattvas, this two-armed 
form with a book in hand certainly emphasized her 
motherly quality surrounded by her spiritual sons, 
in this case, bodhisattvas. This is worth remem -
bering as we consider Prajñāpāramit ā images in 
Angkor, especially those made during Jayavarman 
VII’s reign. 
Angkorian examples typically identified as the 
goddess Prajñāpāramit ā look quite different 
from 
the iconographic types known in visual records 
from Indian monastic sites and those recorded in 
sādhana texts of the late 11 th century. For example, 
the Prajñāpāramit ā image in the ABP triad of 
Jayavarman VII’s reign differs considerably from 
most typical images of the goddess Prajñāpāramit ā 
known in India. Two-armed and standing tall, she 
holds a book firmly in her right hand and a lotus 
bud in her left. Both hands are held low along the 
hip, projecting slightly forward. In contrast, the 
gesture of preaching (dharmacakrapravartana- 
mudr ā, developed from the iconography of the first 
sermon) is the most typical mudr ā shown in the 
images of Prajñāpāramit ā from the 9 th century 
onwards in India as seen in the stone stele of Pra-
jñāpāramit ā now in the Asian Art Museum, San 
Francisco (Fig. 5.12 ). Although the found spot of 
the image is unknown, it is likely to have been pre-
pared at an important monastic site in Magadha 
22. The image was found with a larger Nāgarāja image. 
Asher (1980: 82) suggests that these two images were stra-
tegically placed as guardians of the transcendent wisdom. I 
suggest that they were not just guardians but rather the very 
representation of the transcendent wisdom as the mother 
with her protector/promulgator. This image of the goddess 
presaged a vision of Prajñāpāramitā that became important 
in subsequent centuries while the Nāgarāja image planted a 
seed for the image of Nāgārjuna in later Tibetan Buddhist 
iconography. 
23. In fact, the N āland ā imag e appears remarkably similar 
to the m ātṛkās image s in Cave 21 at Ellora. (today’s Bihar, India). This iconography travelled 
far beyond the Magadhan Buddhist centres. From 
the 9 th-century metal sculpture of Prajñāpāramit ā 
of Sri Lankan origin reportedly found in southern 
Thailand (Fig. 5.13 ) to the famous royally spon-
sored Si ṅhasāri Prajñāpāramit ā of ca. 1300  CE 
from Candi Singhosari, East Java (Museum Na -
sional, Indonesia, Jakarta), the two-armed goddess 
is shown displaying the gesture of preaching. Yet, 
this gesture is absent in all surviving Angkorian 
examples, whether two-armed or multi-armed.24 
Even in ten-armed or twenty-two armed forms, 
24. We should also note that this gesture of preaching is 
cons
picuously absent in Khmer Buddhist images. In fact, 
the earth-touching gesture that becomes ubiquitous in 
Pāla period Buddha images does not seem to have a huge 
impact on the production of Buddha images in Angkor. 
The absolute preference especially of the Jayavarman VII’s 
era is the gesture of meditation, signalling both cultural 
confidence and conservatism of image makers and knowl -
edge experts behind iconographic choices. Fig. 5.12: Goddess Prajñāpāramitā, Bihar (Nālandā?), 
India, c. 825–875 CE. Asian Art Museum, San 
Francisco B62S32. 
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   177 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 180] ---
Jinah Kim178
the main hands are held apart, low by the hip, each 
holding a book and a lotus bud.
In Conze’s survey of Prajñāpāramit ā images, 
only the Angkorian examples feature as many as 
twenty-two arms, the highest number of arms 
known in the corpus of surviving Prajñāpāramit ā 
images, and they are not recorded in any known 
textual source (Conze 1949 –50: 51). The twen -
ty-two armed, eleven headed (1+4+6 ) standing 
image of the goddess in bronze that hails from 12 th 
or 13th century Angkor does not look anything 
like the preaching goddess of wisdom represented 
through the Prajñāpāramit ā iconography codified 
and circulating widely in other parts of the Bud -
dhist world by this time (Fig. 5.14 ). We would have 
been left puzzling over the identity of this goddess, 
if it was not for the inscription on the pedestal that 
reads, ‘Vraḥ r ūpa vraḥ Prajñāpāramitā’, literally an 
‘holy image (form) of holy Prajñāpāramitā’ (Cœdès 
1920 : 7–8 ). Khmer Prajñāpāramitā images may be 
‘outside the mainstream’ as Conze characteriz-
es them, but at the same time, their stylistic and iconographic uniqueness indicates the level of con -
fidence on the part of Khmer knowledge experts 
and image makers that produced these images fol-
lowing their own, local visual language. More im-
portantly, the unique iconographic formulation in 
Angkorian Prajñāpāramitā images can help unpack 
the little understood process behind the formation 
of a divine iconography in a doctrinally complex 
environment.
meditating buddha on the headdress
One of the common features in Angkorian Pra -
jñāpāramitā images is the presence of the medi -
tating Buddha on the headdress. Even in a mul -Fig. 5.14: Twenty-two armed Prajnāpāramitā, Angkor, 
late 12th–13th century. After G. Cœdès, ‘Note sur une 
statuette Cambodgienne de la Prajñāpāramitā’ , BEFEO 
20 (4) (1920): 7–8. Fig. 5.13: Praj ñāpāramitā, Sr
i Lanka, probably 
Polunaruwa, ca. 9th century, reportedly found in 
southern Thailand. Copper alloy with traces of gilding, 
15 × 13 × 7 cm, V&A, IS.21-1988. Image © Victoria and 
Albert Museum, London.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   178 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 181] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor179
image of Akṣobhya who holds the earth-touch-
ing gesture.26 Yet, even among Indian examples, 
this particular insignia is absent in most surviving 
artistic evidence representing the goddess.27 The 
26. Woodward (2015: 248) glosses over this discrepancy of 
the jina on the crown and does not explain why it is a med-
itating Buddha rather than Akṣobhya when he characterizes 
that Jayavarman VII’s reign’s two-armed Prajñāpāramitā 
images developed in accord ‘with the Indian textual de-
scription’. Indian sādhana texts are discussed below.
27. Here is another good example to warn against wholesale 
adoption of sādhana texts for explaining surviving images 
from different periods and contexts. Prajñāpāramitā’s con-
nection with Akṣobhya in these sādhanas has more to do 
with her essential connection with the enlightenment, as 
the progenitor of enlightenment, which is most power-
fully represented through the image of Buddha touching 
the earth to call to witness this victorious moment. The 
Buddha’s awakening experience at dawn under the bodhi 
tree that is encapsulated in this iconography informed the 
iconographic formulation of Akṣobhya: his association with 
eastern direction and the colour blue suggest this narrative 
connection. See Kim 2021: 232–233. ti-armed, multi-headed example, like the inscribed 
standing example discussed by Cœdès, an image 
of a Buddha in meditation appears on the apex of 
the stacked heads. As seen in a seated, twenty-two-
armed, eleven headed metal image of the goddess 
now in the National Museum Phnom Penh, the 
Buddha in meditation appears in front of the 
conical shaped hairdo, as if affixed on a diadem or 
a crown (Fig. 5.15 ). Who is this Buddha and why 
is he on the headdress of Prajñāpāramitā? What 
is the meaning of this small insignia? The Buddha 
on the headdress is adopted to signal and codify a 
spiritual lineage system in Esoteric Buddhist ico -
nography.25 In Sanskrit sādhana texts that record 
the forms of Prajñāpāramitā invoked in vision -
ary practices in the 11 th-century Indic Buddhist 
world, Prajñāpāramitā is known with two types of 
headgear: bearing either the five tathāgatas or the 
25. The earliest instance of this formulation may be the 
meditating Buddha Amitābha on the headdress of Ava-
lokiteśvara images. Fig. 5.15: Twenty-two armed Prajñāpāramitā, c. late 12th–early 13th century. National Museum, 
Phnom Penh Ga5333.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   179 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 182] ---
Jinah Kim180
meditating Buddha in the headdress signals Ami- 
tābha especially in the five tathāgata system of 
‘Phase Two’ Esoteric Buddhist texts like the Sar -
vatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha. The confident icono -
graphic expression seen in Khmer Prajñāpāramitā 
images urges us to explore further the potential 
connection between Amitābha and Prajñāpāramitā 
and its significance. I propose two possible expla-
nations, one historical and the other more liturgical 
and ritual-based. 
If the Buddha in the headdress is indeed Ami- 
tābha, it underscores the indebtedness of Pra -
jñāpāramitā iconography to Mahāyāna cultic 
deities, especially the bodhisattva of compassion, 
Avalokiteśvara. Amitābha on the headdress is a 
typical iconographic feature of Avalokiteśvara, es-
tablished from at least the 4th century onwards, as 
suggested by both textual and art historical evi -
dence (Bautze-Picron 2004: 228; Studholme 2002: 
14–15). Early images of Prajñāpāramitā were most 
likely modelled after images of ‘mother goddesses’ 
known in the Brahmanical context, such as the 
Saptamātṛk ās (seven mothers), just as images of 
the archetype Buddhist goddess Tārā may have 
been modelled after Hindu goddesses (Ghosh 
1980: 26; Shaw 2006: 313). Whatever her icono-
graphic model, Tārā is unquestionably tied to 
Avalokiteśvara, either as an attendant or a female 
articulation of the same principle, i.e. compassion 
(as personification of Avalokiteśvara’s tears of 
compassion). The iconography of Aṣṭamahābhaya 
Tārā (Tārā as a saviouress from eight great perils), 
for example, is compositionally nearly identical 
with the iconography of Avalokiteśvara in the 
same role.28 In later Indian Buddhist sādhanas, 
Tārā is categorized under Amoghasiddhi’s family, 
but various origin stories of Tārā recorded in the 
Tibetan cannon recall her deep connection to Ava-
lokiteśvara (Shaw 2006: 307). 
In the Sādhanamāl ā, a late 11 th-century com-
pilation of 
Sanskrit sādhana texts, there is a single 
occasion in which Tārā is envisioned as holding 
Buddha Amitābha on her hair (amitābhabuddha- 
madhyām jaṭikām), which is number 109  in Bhat-
28. Tārā effectively replaces him in this role at various 
medieval Buddhist sites in eastern India (e.g., Odisha) and 
also in the Himalayas. tacharyya (1968 : 222). Although Multzer o’Naghten 
(2016 : 43) mentions this text as one of the twen -
ty-nine Tārā sādhanas in the Sādhanamāl ā, strictly 
speaking, it is not a sādhana but a vidhi (instruc-
tion for a rite—in this case, stutividhi for adula -
tion of the goddess), based on one Sragdharāstuti, 
more precisely the Āryatārāsragdharāstotra (lit. 
‘Hymn to the noble Tārā, in sragdhar ā metre’) by 
a Kashmiri master (mahāpaṇḍita
) Sarvajñāmitra 
(Bhattacharyya 1968 : 222–224 ). The date of the 
author, Sarvajñāmitra, has been suggested as the 
8th century based on the appearance of his name in 
the 12th-century Kashmiri chronicle Rājataraṅgiṇῑ 
(Vidyabhusana 1908 : xxx). If the 8th-century date 
of Sarvajñ āmitra can be entertained, stories about 
him remembered in the later Tibetan sources, like 
Tāranātha’s History of Indian Buddhism and the 
Pagsam-jon-zang, provides one window to con -
sider trans-regional movement of visions of the 
goddess. Tibetan stories about Sarvajñāmitra recall 
that he was a Buddhist monk from Kashmir who 
resided at Nāland ā in the 8th century whose de -
votion to Tārā saved many lives. His vidhi also 
mentions Prajñāpāramitā as an epithet of a two-
armed form of Tārā. In a way, a Kashmiri Buddhist 
monk Sarvajñāmitra provides a tantalizing thread 
to connect rather different early articulations of 
the goddess Prajñāpāramitā, one in the Kashmir 
region (Gilgit) and the other at N āland ā. Although 
the relationship between Tārā and Prajñāpāramitā 
especially in terms of their respective historical 
origin and subsequent iconographic development 
is out of the scope of the present chapter, it is im-
portant to note continued overlaps between the 
two goddesses (such as the common iconographic 
attribute of utpala) even after the introduction of a more defined iconographic form of the goddess 
Prajñāpāramitā at Magadhan Buddhist sites and 
beyond. As Christian Luczanits (2004 : 216) notes, 
in the Sumtseg at Alchi, a western Himalayan Bud -
dhist site with a contemporaneous construction 
date to Jayavarman VII’s reign, Prajñāpāramitā and 
Tārā are not completely distinct from each other 
with a lot of overlaps and shared features. 
As seen in Fig. 5.6 , an early image of Pra -
jñāpāramitā is paired with an image of Ava-
lokiteśvara outside Ellora’s Cave 10 , hinting at a 
devotional milieu in which images of the goddess 
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   180 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 183] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor181
Prajñāpāramitā may have been formulated.29 In 
a way, Amitābha on the headdress of Angkorian 
Prajñāpāramitā images may be taken as a point of 
reference to the undocumented devotional cultic 
milieu in which early Prajñāpāramitā images 
were shaped along with images of Tārā and Ava-
lokiteśvara. If this hypothesis can be entertained, 
we may suggest that the unique Angkorian Pra -
jñāpāramitā iconography remembers an older 
layer of iconographic development before codi -
fication of iconographic types that ushered in at 
Buddhist monastic sites in eastern India during 
the 11th century. 
amitābha and prajñāpāramit ā
Angkorian Prajñāpāramitā images record a rela -
tionship between Amitābha and Prajñāpāramitā 
that no surviving text seems to testify. An intriguing 
clue to understand this relationship that seems to 
have been well understood in 12th- and 13th-cen-
tury Angkor is found in manuscripts of the Pra -
jñāpāramitā texts, especially of the AsP, prepared in 
12th-century eastern India. As discussed elsewhere, 
there are at least eight dated 12 th-century painted 
manuscripts of the AsP that feature Amitābha and 
Prajñāpāramitā facing each other on the first two 
folios (Kim 2021 : 124, Table 3.1 ). For example, in 
a late 12 th-century AsP manuscript sponsored by a 
lay donor now in the Asiatic Society, Mumbai (Kim 
2013 , Web 5-4 ), the central panel of folio 1 verso 
houses an image of the Buddha Amitābha, clearly 
identifiable by his meditation gesture and his red 
colour, being adored by four monks.30 The facing 
panel of folio 2 recto is a two-armed seated image 
of the goddess Prajñāpāramitā, holding her hands 
in front of her chest in preaching gesture with two 
lotus blossoms on either side of her shoulder, each 
topped by a manuscript. This pairing, which is not 
attested in any known text, seems rather unexpect-
29. In fact, outcropping of goddess images and incon -
sistency and variation in iconographic details suggest a 
strongly experiential nature of goddess worship at Ellora.
30. For published images of some of these examples, also 
see Kim (2013), figs. 5-7, Web 2-1, and Web 5-6. The ‘Web’ 
figures are available online at https://www.ucpress.edu/
book/9780520273863/receptacle-of-the-sacred. ed given the close proximity between the Sanskrit 
sādhanas and the images of Buddhist deities that 
appear in painted AsP manuscripts from eastern 
India (Kim 2013 , 2021 ).31 
Eastern Indian manuscripts that feature 
the prominent pairing of Amitābha and Pra-
jñāpāramitā may not directly explain the enig-
matic relationship between Amitābha and Pra-
jñāpāramitā in Angkorian Prajñāpāramitā images, 
but further consideration of the ritual context in 
which these manuscripts were used help shed light 
on it. As I have suggested elsewhere (Kim 2013 , 
2015 ), these manuscripts were prepared in ‘deluxe’ 
editions with painted panels to serve ritual needs 
of Esoteric Buddhist communities in eastern India. 
As seen in a stele of the goddess Prajñāpāramitā 
from the eastern coastal state of Odisha in India, a manuscript, represented as a horizontally shaped 
bar on a single legged pedestal in the centre of the 
bottom register, is a central object of a ritual at-
tended by a ritual master who holds a vajra and a 
ghaṇṭa—a set of quintessential Esoteric Buddhist 
ritual implements—in his hands with offerings 
next to him while a group of lay devotees pay 
homage to the book from the opposite side (Fig. 
5.16). This stele most likely dates to the late 11th 
century or the 12 th century, given the exception-
ally deep carving and other stylistic features, such as the delicately carved treatment of the tri-lobed architectural framing device around the goddess, as well as the clear articulation of a book-centred 
ritual scene.
32 The manuscript placed in the centre 
of the ritual scene depicted with flower offerings on top is most likely a beautifully prepared manu-
script of the Prajñāpāramitā. In addition to a clear 
reference to a book as a central object of a ritual, 
other iconographic elements suggest that the image 
31. Pairings of other deities in this manuscript are pred -
icated by their consort relationships known in texts for 
tantric visionary practices, like Saṃvara with Vajrayoginī, 
and Heruka with Nairātmyā. 
32. Images from Odisha are difficult to date with certainty 
as very few examples survive with a secure date. Thomas 
Donaldson’s survey of Buddhist sculptures of Odisha is 
extremely useful, but his dates are not based on any serious 
stylistic analysis or art historical investigation. The appear -
ance of the book-centred ritual scene with a ritual master 
suggests a post-11th century date as observed by Claudine 
Bautze-Picron (1995).
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   181 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 184] ---
Jinah Kim182
was made within a community that also under -
stood a close relationship between Amitābha and 
Prajñāpāramitā. Surrounding the goddess above 
the tri-lobed arch are five tathāgatas arranged as 
if floating around the architecture in which Pra -
jñāpāramit ā sits, and the apex, right above the 
crown, is occupied by none other than Amitābha. 
If the human world below depicts devotees 
with an organized ritual scene, the heavenly realm 
above Prajñāpāramitā is filled with auspicious de-
votional fervour. Interspersed between the five tathāgatas, two standing figures appearing amidst 
wavy pattern (perhaps representing water) offer 
garlands with their bodies slightly bent respectfully 
towards the goddess. Two standing female figures 
positioned on either side of Amitābha hold an of-
fering plate and an incense burner, respectively. 
The top of the stele is finished with two celestial 
beings (often identified as vidy ādharas) flying in 
towards the centre amidst clouds 
from either side, 
carrying offerings for the goddess. These figures 
celebrate the goddess while her spiritual sons rev-
erently hover around her. Two monk-like figures 
seated on either side of the goddess looking up in 
veneration express the awe felt by the human world 
witnessing this auspicious moment of the goddess’ 
preaching that generates her sons. 
In understanding the ritual context in which 
these manuscripts of the AsP were used, we are 
helped by the Vajrāval īnāmamaṇḍalopāyik ā 
[henceforth VA], a ritual manual compiled by the 
famed Indian Buddhist master Abhayākaragup-
ta, who was active at the Vikramaśīla monastery 
during the late 11th–early 12th century. In the VA, 
Abhayākaragupta describes the process by which 
a manuscript is prepared for use in consecration 
within an installation ritual, during which Amitā- 
bha is invoked and visualized within the manu -
script (Mori 1999 : 84–94; 2005 ). As Mori (2005 : 
211) summarizes, in the visualization stage for an 
installation ceremony according to the VA, ‘the 
deities visualized as the pledge-being (samaya-sat-
tva) are Amitābha for sacred texts [pustaka] and 
Vairocana for buildings [vihāra], and their symbols, 
a red lotus [for Amitābha] or an eight-spoked wheel 
[for Vairocana], which is visualized as manifesting 
its form within either the sacred text or the build-
ing.’33 Whether this instruction in the VA inspired 
manuscript makers to include Amitābha in the 
design of manuscripts is difficult to confirm since 
it is equally possible that Abhayākaragupta may 
have recorded what he saw as a common practice 
in manuscript production that followed another set 
of instructions. Interestingly, at least as far as can 
33. The term Mori translates as ‘sacred text’ is pustak a. 
To indicate the material quality of particular items, I take 
this term more straightforwardly as ‘manuscript’ or ‘book’. Fig. 5.16: Stele of the Goddess Praj ñāpāramit ā with 
a r
itual scene on the bottom register, Mangalpur 
(Balasore district), Odisha, 11th century, Odisha State 
Museum. Photo © Sonali Dhingra, 2016.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   182 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 185] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor183
be determined from extant examples, this feature 
was adopted only in the manuscripts of the AsP, 
and only in those prepared somewhere in eastern 
India. The surviving manuscript evidence, then, 
suggests a distinct possibility that the VA’s pustaka 
used in tantric Buddhist ritual practices that A-  
bhayākaragupta compiled may well have been that 
of the AsP. The advanced tantric iconography that 
appears in late 12 th-century AsP manuscripts that 
are heralded by Amitābha in the opening page also 
supports this hypothesis (Kim 2013 , 2021 ). 
The pairing of Amitābha and Prajñāpāramitā 
seen in 12 th-century AsP manuscripts from 
eastern India helps locate Angkor in the Buddhist 
network that seemed to have shared a similar un-
derstanding of Prajñāpāramitā’s importance for 
tantric Buddhist rituals in the 12 th century. Con-
currence of this understanding in Angkor and at 
eastern Indian Buddhist sites is remarkable: out of 
twenty-six dated painted AsP manuscripts known 
from Eastern India, eight manuscripts feature this 
pairing of Amitābha and Prajñāpāramitā, and most 
date to the mid-12 th to the early 13 th centuries 
(Kim 2021 : 122–126 ). Angkorian Prajñāpāramitā 
images remain iconographically and stylistically 
unique, but the appearance of Amitābha on the 
headdress of Prajñāpāramitā images in Angkor 
and the pairing of Amitābha and Prajñāpāramitā 
in painted manuscripts from eastern India offers 
a room to consider Angkor’s trans-regional con -
nections to eastern Indian Buddhist centres, es-
pecially since palm-leaf manuscripts are portable 
objects.34 Although no such instance of painted 
Sanskrit palm-leaf manuscripts is known from 
Angkor, palm-leaf manuscripts with miniature 
paintings embedded in them could certainly have 
informed the knowledge experts in Jayavarman 
VII’s ambit, who, in turn, would have instructed 
these new aspects to be translated into art and ar-
chitecture. While this last statement is a complete 
conjecture, it is worthwhile to keep this model as 
a possibility in our exploration of modes of trans-
34. We may also add here that Cambodia also has a tradi-
tion of making palm-leaf manuscripts in pothi format. How 
ancient this tradition is it is difficult to ascertain, and most 
surviving manuscripts are similar to Sinhalese manuscripts 
that are inscribed with stylus rather than written with ink. fer and transmission of esoteric visual knowledge, 
which must have relied heavily on oral transmis -
sion within an initiation lineage. A manuscript 
could confer spiritual authority to its holder, i.e. a 
Buddhist master, while miniatures could provide 
visual intimations of iconographic information that 
can be adapted by local artists. 
prajñāpāramit ā, the begetter of the 
transcendence
An impressive bronze image of a sixteen-armed, 
multi-headed image of dancing Hevajra (known 
as Kap āladhara Hevajra) signals artistic caliber, 
mastery over bronze casting technique, and the 
impact of tantric Buddhism in Jayavarman VII’s 
empire (Fig. 5.17 ).35 This apotheosis of the Heva-
jratantra, an important text of Yogin ītantras (also 
known as the Anuttarayogatantras in later Tibetan 
classification system) also appears in monumen -
tal stone images and on Jayavarman VII’s temple 
at Banteay Chhmar (Woodward 1981 ; Sharrock 
2006 ).36 These images depicting the complex ico -
nography of Hevajra seem to stand at odds with 
images of Prajñāpāramitā, understood to be a quin -
tessential Mahāyāna Buddhist goddess, and the 
importance of the ABP triadic conception during 
Jayavarman VII’s reign. Here, too, the AsP manu-
scripts from eastern India offer a fresh perspective 
to understand the complex doctrinal context of 
Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarman VII’s Angkor 
and the second/third waves of ‘Vajrayāna Bud -
dhism’ in general. 
A number of late 12 th- and early 13 th-century 
manuscripts of the AsP from eastern India feature 
35. The authenticity of this sculpture was once questioned 
due to several unusual features on the metal’s surface. Un-
wavering efforts to understand the object better by the mu-
seum’s curator, Sonya Rhie Mace, led to multiple rounds of 
scientific examination and deep provenance research, which 
ultimately solved the mystery of the metal’s unique com -
position. Personal communication with the curator, 2017. 
Also see the museum’s object page for further information: 
http://clevelandmuseumofart.art/art/2011.143. 
36. Philip Green (2014) has recently challenged the Hevajra 
identification of Banteay Chhmar images based on a more 
thorough investigation of the iconographic programme. 
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   183 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 186] ---
Jinah Kim184
painted panels that depict images of the Mahāyo-
ga- and Yogin ī-tantras (Anuttarayogatantra in the 
Tibetan classification system). We find images of 
Hevajra and Cakrasa ṃvara, and in two rare exam-
ples, Kālacakra, with their respective consorts on 
the facing folios, which come together in embrace 
when the manuscript is closed (Kim 2013 : 157–166 ). 
A complex image of sixteen armed Kap āladhara 
Hevajra in his fantastic four-legged dancing form 
is perfectly positioned facing his consort Nairātmyā 
in a late 12 th- or early 13 th-century manuscript of 
the AsP now in the Varendra Research Museum 
(Acc. No. 851 ) (Fig. 5.18 ).37 Like all other AsP man-
uscripts bearing tantric iconography from eastern 
India, this manuscript, too, has its opening pages 
marked by Amitābha and Prajñāpāramitā (Kim 
37. See Kim (2021), Chapter 4, for more information about 
this manuscript. 2021 : fig. 4.4 ). It is as if the text of the AsP, person-
ified and preached by the goddess Prajñāpāramitā 
provides a substance, a physical and symbolic body 
that generates these images. The AsP’s text is baf-
fling and esoteric to begin with, which may have 
held a special appeal to the Esoteric Buddhist prac-
titioners (Seton 2017 ).38 Just as Amitābha and Pra-
jñāpāramitā together herald and mark the context 
in which tantric deities arise in eastern Indian 
manuscripts, Angkorian Prajñāpāramitā bearing 
the Buddha in meditation may also be taken as 
generating powerful tantric Buddhist deities like 
Hevajra. 
The generative power of the goddess Pra -
jñāpāramitā may seem to be an expected quality 
of the goddess known as the mother of all tathāga-
tas. The idea of Prajñāpāramitā as the mother to 
all Buddhas, or the ‘Buddha mother’, has been 
frequently assumed ever since Edward Conze’s 
seminal study (1949 ). Yet, Prajñāpāramitā, or the 
perfection of insight (prajñ ā), is not an earthly 
mother goddess, but one of the fundamental the-
ological principles of Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna 
(Esoteric) Buddhism. Relying on an analogy in the 
earliest redaction of the Prajñāpāramitāsūtra, such 
as the AsP, Conze spawned the misconception of 
the Prajñāpāramitā as an age-old mother goddess.39 
The passage in the AsP is an analogy designed to 
emphasize the role of Prajñāpāramitā, or the perfec -
tion of insight, in the process of achieving enlight-
enment. In Chapter 12  of the AsP, Prajñāpāramitā 
is likened to a mother whose many sons eagerly 
care for her because she is their begetter. The 
terms of relationship are explained through what 
the sons/Buddhas should do for their mother/Pra-
jñāpāramitā. Prajñāpāramitā is a mother (māt ā)/a 
begetter (janayitrῑ). But she is not a tender, loving 
mother but rather a rational one who instructs 
and shows the way of the world (lokasya saṃdarśa-  
38. The text’s core conception of śūnyatā  and pa radoxi -
cal approach provided a philosophical foundation for the 
Buddhist Tantras to flourish. 
39. Conze (
1967: 243–244) suggests that the study of the 
images of Prajñāpāramitā affords a ‘contribution to the 
long and varied history of the Mother-goddess who, from 
the Paleolithic onwards, has occupied so great a place in 
human affection.’Fig. 5.17: Kap āladhara H evajra (sixteen-armed dancing 
Hevajra), Jayavarman VII’s reign (c. 1181–1220 CE). 
Bronze; overall: 46 × 23.9 cm. The Cleveland Museum 
of Art, Gift of Maxeen and John Flower in honour of 
Dr Stanislaw Czuma 2011.143.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   184 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 187] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor185
yitrῑ).40 It is only after the 11 th century that we see 
the conception of Prajñāpāramitā as the mother 
of the Buddhas appearing in artistic records in 
India. In the Prajñāpāramitā stele from Odisha 
discussed above (see Fig. 5.17 ), the arrangement of 
hovering five tathāgatas surrounding the goddess 
references the generative power of the goddess Pra-
jñāpāramitā as the begetter of the transcendental 
tathāgatas. A late 12 th-century manuscript cover 
from the N āland ā monastery (in today’s Bihar, 
India) depicts the goddess Prajñāpāramitā in the 
centre attended by the Buddhas of the past, the 
present, and the future (Kim 2013 : 169). This ar-
ticulation of Prajñāpāramitā in 12 th-century India 
suggests that Jayavarman VII (and his advisors)’s 
emphasis on Prajñāpāramitā’s motherly quality 
was a political move that embraced crystallization 
of Prajñāpāramitā’s role in Esoteric Buddhism in 
familial terms, which in turn allowed Jayavarman 
VII to situate himself in the apex of power. 
40. Conze 1973: 173; AsP , Vaid ya edition, p. 125.epilogue
In Mus ée Guimet’s renowned Khmer collec -
tion, we find a rare image of nearly life size stone 
sculpture of a female figure from Jayavarman 
VII’s reign, at one point identified as ‘Seated Tārā’ 
(Jessup and Z éphir 1997: 304– 305
). The image is 
carved fully in the round (Fig. 5.19). Her upper 
body with compact chest is left bare while del-
icately patterned skirt wraps around her lower 
body as she kneels tall. Her eyes are closed under 
thick, well defined eyebrows, and she holds a 
broad, subtle smile on her lips, evoking familial 
affinity with the well-known portrait sculptures 
of Jayavarman VII. With her head ever so slightly 
tilted downwards, the unnamed sculptor master-
fully created an image that epitomizes serenity in 
flesh. Perhaps it is this humanity or evocation of a 
person along with the unique posture of kneeling 
that prompts the identification of the statue as an 
image of Jayarājadevī, one of the two principal 
queens of Jayavarman VII (Baptiste and Z éphir 
2008). According to the inscription left by her 
Fig. 5.18: Kap āladhara H evajra (sixteen armed and four legged). Fol. 44v. AsP manuscript, Bengal, 
late 12th–early 13th century. Pigment and ink on palm-leaf, folio size: 31.6 × 6 cm. Varendra 
Research Museum, University of Rajshahi (VRM) Acc. No. 851. Photo by Jinah Kim.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   185 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 188] ---
Jinah Kim186
sister, Indradevī, who was the second principal 
queen of Jayavarman VII, she had images of the 
royal couple, Jayavarman VII and her late sister, 
Jayarājadevī, installed across Jayavarman VII’s 
territory (K 485; Multzer o’Naghten 2016: 44).41 
Her arms are unfortunately missing from just 
below the armpit, making it impossible to suggest 
how she held her hands, adding to the enigma of 
the image.42 In front of a tightly pulled chignon on 
the very top of her head is a seated Buddha in med-
itation, which, as we have seen, is a common icono -
41. According to Multzer o’Naghten (2016), so far, seven 
such st
atues are known. 
42. If her hands were held together in front of her chest 
holding a lotus, it would 
be a clear indication of adoration, 
as Woodward (1994–95) discusses in other Jayavarman era 
images. graphic indicator of the goddess Prajñāpāramitā 
in Jayavarman VII’s Angkor. If this is Jayarājadevī 
represented in the mould of Prajñāpāramitā, in 
a way, this image participates in an interesting 
trope of projecting a human queen on the image 
of goddess Prajñāpāramitā in different parts of the 
Buddhist world. In addition to the famous Pra -
jñāpāramitā stone statue of 1300  CE from Candi 
Singhosari, East Java, popularly identified with the 
Queen Ken Dedes of the Si ṅhasāri dynasty (Reichle 
2007 ; Multzer o’Naghten 2016 ), the 7th-century 
Gilgit bronze image of Prajñāpāramitā mentioned 
earlier may also have a connection with the queen, 
Maṅgalahāṃsikā named in the inscription on the 
pedestal of the image (see Fig. 5.10 ).43 In compar-
43. Along with many unique elements only seen in this 
image, the unusual headdress of bird feathers that are held 
by two haṃsas (swans, i.e. auspicious bird) on either side, 
may in fact be a reference to the queen, Maṅgalahaṃsika, 
whose name means auspicious swan (Seton 2008; Luczanits 
2016). I thank Greg Seton for sharing his paper and insight 
on the sculpture. 
Fig. 5.19: Prajñāpāramitā/Jayarājadevī/?, 
Jayavarman VII’s reign. Stone. H: 130 cm. Mus ée 
Guimet, Pari
s. MG 18043. Photo © Jinah Kim.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   186 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 189] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor187
ison to the Singhosari Prajñāpāramitā image that 
follows the iconographic code established in Maga -
dhan sites quite closely, perhaps the formula here 
is not the queen as the goddess, but the goddess 
represented like a human queen whose images 
protect the territory like the Khmer kings whose 
posthumous titles locate them in the realm of gods 
(Kim 2010 : 114 ; Woodward 1994 –95: 108 ).
Multzer o’Naghten (2016 : 48) suggests a possi-
bility of a devotional practice of wearing insignia 
of one’s tutelary deity (or one’s chosen deity in a 
tantric lineage tradition) during Jayavarman VII’s 
reign.44 The miniature image of Viṣṇu affixed on 
44. See Multzer o’Naghten (2016) for illustration (fig. 21). 
She suggests that the miniature image on Jayavarman VII’s Jayavarman VII’s hairdo carved on the walls at 
Banteay Chhmar suggests a practice akin to other 
such practices of affixing sectarian insignia in 
various faith communities, such as those known 
among Śaiva groups in India.45 Following Multzer 
o’Naghten’s suggestion, we may hypothesize that 
the Buddha in meditation may have been such 
a devotional insignia of the queen although this 
remains a highly imaginative speculation. 
hairdo is of Avalokiteśvara. According to Peter Sharrock 
(2015), this image is of Viṣṇu as the Khmer god of war. 
45. For example, Lingayats are known to carry the sectar -
ian marks like śivali ṅgas on their body. Jangams in today’s 
Punjab wear li ṅga and fea ther on their turbans. I thank 
Swati Chemburkar for this reference. Fig. 5.20: Angkor gallery, Mus ée Guimet. Ins tallation shot taken in August 2009. Photo © Jinah Kim.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   187 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 190] ---
Jinah Kim188
As seen in the photograph taken in 2009  (Fig. 
5.20), the image is displayed together with the 
‘Radiant’ Avalokiteśvara, the multi-armed Ava-
lokiteśvara images that Hiram Woodward (1994 –
95) identifies as a special type of Avalokiteśvara 
image distributed by Jayavarman VII across his 
territory, Jayabuddhamahānātha. Above them in 
the middle on a higher pedestal is a seated image 
of the Buddha in meditation under a n āga hood. 
Although the image is slightly damaged, the scale 
and the installation position make the hierarchy 
among the three certain.46 In this Guimet-gener-
ated context that simulates Jayavarman VII’s ABP 
triad, the evocation of the goddess Prajñāpāramitā 
is clear. With the Buddha in meditation under the 
nāga hood hovering over her, whether the Buddha 
in meditation on her head is Amitābha or not may 
not matter as much.47 The most important focus 
in the image is on deep meditation and sincere 
humility, which transcends any particular sectar -
ian association. If anything, the Buddha that she 
bears most dearly may in fact be the very Buddha 
in the centre of Bayon who her consort Jayavar -
man VII installed, encapsulating the pious, deeply 
personal dimension of the political use of religious 
iconography. 
References
Acri, Andrea, ed. 2016. Esoteric Buddhism in Medi-
aeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, 
Icons. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Akhtar, Naseem. 2001. Patna Museum Catalogue: 
Terracottas and Metal Images. Patna: Patna 
Museum.
Asher, Frederick M. 1980. The Art of Eastern India, 
300-800. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baptiste, Pierre and Thierry Zéphir. 2008. L’art 
Khmer dans les collections du Mus ée Guimet. 
Paris: Réunion des musées nationaux.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 1995. ‘Between Men 
and Gods: Small Motifs in the Buddhist Art of 
46. The Prajñāpāramitā is from Preah Khan of Angkor 
Thom an
d the others from Preah Khan of Kompong Svay.
47. Her pul
led chignon in fact forms a mandorla around 
the Buddha and the unnamed artist may have carved the 
detail of braided (?) hair to evoke the shape of the n āga 
hood wi
th its multiple heads and scale. Eastern India, an Interpretation’, in K.R. van 
Kooij and H. van der Veere (eds.), Function 
and Meaning in Buddhist Art: Proceedings of 
a Seminar Held at Leiden University, 21–24 
October 1991, pp. 59–79. Groningen: Egbert 
Forsten.
. 2004. ‘The Universal Compassionate Bo-
dhisattva, Miscellaneous Aspects of Avaloki-
tasvara/Avalokiteshvara in India’, Silk Road Art 
and Archaeology 10: 225–290.
. 2015. The Forgotten Place: Stone Images 
from Kurkihar, Bihar. 1st ed. New Delhi: 
Archæological Survey of India.
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh. 1925 [reprint 1968]. 
Sādhanam ālā. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, 2 
vols. Vol. 1. Baroda: Oriental Institute of Baroda.
. 1968. The Indian Buddhist Iconography, 
Mainly Based on the S ādhanam ālā and Cognate 
Tantric Texts of Rituals. 2nd revised and en-
larged ed. Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay. 
[1st ed. 1924]
Bianchini, Francesco. 2020. The Tradition and 
Innovation in late South Asian Buddhism: The 
Impact of Spell Practices on the Recasting of Pra-
jñāpāramitā Scriptures. PhD thesis, University 
of Oxford. 
Bourgarit, David, Benoît Mille, Thierry Borel, Pierre 
Baptiste, and Thierry Zéphir. 2003. ‘A Millen-
nium of Khmer Bronze Metallurgy: A Tech-
nical Study of Seventy-five Bronze Artefacts 
from the Musee Guimet and the Phnom Penh 
National Museum’, in Paul Jett (with Janet G. 
Douglas, Blythe McCarthy, and John Winter, 
eds.), Scientific Research in the Field of Asian 
Art: Proceedings of the 1st Forbes Symposium at 
the Freer Gallery of Art, pp. 103–126. London: 
Archetype.
Bunker, Emma C. 2015. ‘Pala-inspired Vajrayana 
Buddhist Bronzes from the Khorat Plateau: The 
Khmer-Pala Link’, Marg  67/2: 86–95.
Cœdès, George. 1906. ‘La Stèle de Ta-Prohm’, Bul-
letin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 6: 
44–86.
. 1920. ‘Note sur une statuette cambodgienne 
de la Prajnâ Pâramita’, Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 20: 7–8.
. 1937. Inscriptions du Cambodge. 8 vols. 
Hanoi: Imprimerie d’Extrême-Orient.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   188 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 191] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor189
. 1941. ‘La Stèle du Práh Khằn d’Ankor’, Bul -
letin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 41: 
255–302.
. 1989. Articles sur le pays Khmer. Paris: École 
Française d’Extrême-Orient.
Conze, Edward. 1948. ‘Text, Sources, and Bibliog-
raphy of the Praj ñāpāramit ā-hṛdaya’, Journal 
of the Royal Asiatic Society 80/1–2: 33–51.
. 1949–50. ‘The Iconography of the Pra -
jñāpāramit ā—Part 1’, Oriental Art 1: 47–52.
. 1951. Buddhism: Its Essence and Develop-
ment. New York: Philosophical Library,
. 1956. ‘Tantric Praj ñāpāramit ā Texts’, Si-
no-Indian Studies V/2: 100–122.
. 1960. The Prajnaparamita Literature. In-
do-Iranian Monograph. Gravenhage: Mouton.
. 1967. ‘The Iconography of the Pra-
jñāpāramitā’, in Edward Conze (ed.), Thirty 
Years of Buddhist Studies: Selected Essays by 
Edward Conze. Oxford: Bruno Cassirer.
. 1973. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight 
Thousand Lines and Its Verse Summary. Bolinas, 
CA: Four Seasons Foundation.
. 1978. The Praj ñāpāramit ā Literature. 2nd 
revised and enlarged ed. Tokyo: Reiyukai.
Davidson, Ronald M. 2002. Indian Esoteric Bud -
dhism: A Social History of the Tantric Movement.  
New York: Columbia Uniersity Press.
de Mallmann, Marie-Thérèse. 1975. Introduction à 
l’iconographie du tântrisme bouddhique. Paris: 
Centre de recherches sur l’Asie centrale et la 
Haute Asie. (Bibliothèque du Centre de re -
cherches sur l’Asie centrale et la Haute Asie, 1).
Dowling, Nancy. 1996. ‘Honolulu Academy of 
Art Tenth-Century Khmer Buddhist Trinity’, 
Artibus Asiae 56/3–4: 325–341.
Estève, Julia and Brice Vincent. 2010. ‘L’about 
inscrit du musée national du Cambodge (K. 
943): Nouveaux éléments sur le bouddhisme 
tantrique à l’époque angkorienne’, Arts Asia -
tiques 65: 133–158.
Falk, Harry and Seishi Karashima. 2013. ‘A 
First-Century Prajñāpāramitā Manuscript from 
Gandhāra—Parivarta 5 (Texts from the Split 
Collection 2)’, Annual Report of the Internation-
al Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology 
at Soka University XVI, pp. 97–169.Ghosh, Mallar. 1980. Development of Buddhist 
Iconography in Eastern India: A Study of T ārā, 
Prajñās of Five Tath āgatas and Bhṛiku ṭī. New 
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Green, Phillip S.E. 2014. ‘The Many Faces of 
Lokeśvara: Tantric Connections in Cambodia 
and Camp ā between the Tenth and Thirteenth 
Centuries’, History of Religions 54/1: 69–93.
Harrison, Paul (ed.). 2018. ‘Early Mahāyāna: Laying 
out the Field’, in Paul Harrison (ed.), Setting Out 
on the Great Way: Essays on Early Mahāyāna 
Buddhism. Sheffield, South Yorkshire; Bristol, 
CT: Equinox Publishing. 
Harrison, Paul and Jens-Uwe Hartmann (eds.). 2014. 
From Birch Bark to Digital Data: Recent Ad -
vances in Buddhist Manuscript Research: Papers 
Presented at the Conference Indic Buddhist Man -
uscripts: The State of the Field, Stanford, June 
15-19, 2009. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften.
von Hin über, Oskar. 2007. ‘Three New Bronzes 
from Gilgit’. Annual Report of the Internation-
al Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University for the Academic Year 2006  
(Vol. 10), pp. 39–43. 
Huntington, John and Dina Bangdel. 2003. The 
Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art. Co-
lumbus, Ohio: Columbus Museum of Art; 
Chicago: Serindia Publications. 
Jessup, Helen I. and Thierry Zephir (eds.). 1997. 
Sculpture of Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: 
Millennium of Glory. Washington, D.C.: Na -
tional Gallery of Art.
Kim, Jinah. 2010. ‘Unfinished Business: Buddhist 
Reuse of Angkor Wat and Its Historical and 
Political Significance’, Artibus Asiae 70/1: 
77–122.
. 2013. Receptacle of the Sacred: Illustrated 
Manuscripts and the Buddhist Book-Cult in 
South Asia. Berkeley, CA: University of Cali -
fornia Press.
. 2015. ‘Painted Palm-Leaf Manuscripts and 
the Art of the Book in Medieval South Asia’, 
Archives of Asian Art 65/1–2: 57–86. 
. 2019. ‘Performing Texts, Engendering 
Merits: Manuscripts and Paubhas as Ritual 
Objects’, in Jinah Kim and Todd Lewis (eds.), 
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   189 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 192] ---
Jinah Kim190
Dharma and Puṇya: Buddhist Ritual Art of 
Nepal, pp. 88–91. Leiden: Hotei Publishing. 
. 2021. Garland of Visions: Color, Tantra, and 
a Material History of Indian Painting. Oakland, 
CA: University of California Press. 
Kinnard, Jacob N. 1999. Imaging Wisdom: Seeing 
and Knowing in the Art of Indian Buddhism. 
Richmond, Surrey: Curzon.
Linrothe, Robert N. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: 
Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan Esoteric 
Buddhist Art. Boston; New York: Shambhala.
Lobo, Wibke. 1997. ‘L’image de Hevajra et le boud-
dhisme tantrique’, in Helen I. Jessup and Thierry 
Zéphir (eds.), Angkor et dix Siècles d’art Khmer, 
pp. 70–78. Paris: Réunion des musées nationaux.
Luczanits, Christian. 2004. Buddhist Sculpture 
in Clay: Early Western Himalayan Art, Late 
10th to Early 13th Centuries. Chicago: Serindia 
Publications. 
. 2016. ‘Prajñāpāramitā, Alchi and Kashmir: 
On the Cultural Background of a Unique 
Bronze’, in An Exceptional and Magnificent 
Bronze Alloy Figure of Prajnaparamita. Beijing: 
Poly Auction. 
Malandra, Geri. 1993. Unfolding a Maṇḍala: The 
Buddhist Cave Temples at Ellora. Albany: State 
University of New York Press. 
Mori, Masahide. 2005. ‘The Installation Ceremo -
ny in Tantric Buddhism’, in Shingo Einoo and 
Jun Takashima (eds.), From Material to Deity: 
Indian Rituals of Consecration, pp. 199–240. 
New Delhi: Manohar Publishers.
. 1999. ‘The Vajr āvalī of Abhay ākaragupta: 
A Critical Study, Sanskrit Edition of Selected 
Chapters and Complete Tibetan Version’. PhD 
Dissertation, SOAS, University of London.
Multzer o’Naghten, Hedwige. 2016. ‘Praj ñāpāramit ā 
dans le bouddhisme du Cambodge ancien’, Arts 
Asiatiques 71: 31–54.
Owen, Lisa. 2013. ‘Relationships between Art, Ar-
chitecture, and Devotional Practices at Ellora’, 
in Pia Brancaccio (ed.), Living Rock: Buddhist, 
Hindu, and Jain Cave Temples in the Western 
Deccan, pp. 126–137. Mumbai: Marg Publica-
tions.
Pal, Pratapaditya. 1988. ‘A Forgotten Monastery of 
Ancient Bihar’, South Asian Studies 4: 83–88.Polkinghorne, Martin, Brice Vincent, Nicolas 
Thomas, and David Bourgarit. 2014. ‘Casting for 
the King: The Royal Palace Bronze Workshop 
of Angkor Thom’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 100: 327–358.
Reichle, Natasha. 2007. Violence and Serenity: Late 
Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Sastri, Hirananda. 1966. Nalanda and Its Epigraphic 
Material. New Delhi: Archaeological Survey of 
India.
Seton, Gregory Max. 2008. ‘The Mother Pra -
jñāpāramitā and the Development of Buddhist 
Yoginī Tantra’. A paper delivered at the Uni -
versity of California, Santa Barbara.
. 2015. ‘Defining Wisdom: Ratn ākara śānti’s 
Sāratam ā’. DPhil dissertation, Wolfson College, 
Oxford University.
. 2017. ‘Integrating Non-Tantric and Tantric 
Doctrines through Prajñāpāramitā at 
Vikramaśīla During the Mid Eleventh Century’, 
paper presented at the XVIIIth Congress of In-
ternational Association of Buddhist Studies, 
University of Toronto.
Shah, Umakant Premanand. 1987. Jaina-r ūpa- 
maṇḍana = Jaina Iconography. New Delhi: 
Abhinav Publications.
Sharrock, Peter D. 2006. ‘Hevajra at Bantéay 
Chmàr’, The Journal of the Walters Art Museum 
64/65: 49–64.
. 2007. ‘The Mystery of the Bayon Face 
Towers’, in J. Clark (ed.), Bayon: New Perspec-
tives, pp. 230–281. Bangkok: River Books. 
. 2009. ‘Garu ḍa, Vajrap āṇi and Religious 
Change in Jayavarman VII’s Angkor’, Journal 
of Southeast Asian Studies 40/1: 111–151.
. 2012. ‘Kīrtipa ṇḍita and the Tantras’, Udaya: 
Journal of Khmer Studies 10: 203–237. 
. 2013. ‘The Tantric Roots of the Buddhist 
Pantheon of Jayavarman VII’, in Marijke J. 
Klokke and Véronique Degroot (eds.), Materi-
alizing Southeast Asia’s Past: Selected Papers of 
the 12th International Conference of the Euro-
pean Association of Southeast Asian Archaeol-
ogists, Vol. 2, pp. 41–55. Singapore: NUS Press. 
. 2015. ‘Serpent-enthroned Buddha of 
Angkor’, Marg 67/2: 21–31.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   190 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 193] ---
Goddess Prajñāpāramit ā and Esoteric Buddhism in Jayavarm an VII’s Angkor191
Sharrock, Peter D., Claude Jacques, Olivier Cunin 
and Thierry Zephir. 2015. Banteay Chhmar: 
Garrison-temple of the Khmer empire. Bangkok: 
River Books. 
Shaw, Miranda. 2006. Buddhist Goddesses of India. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Snellgrove, David L. 1987. Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: 
Indian Buddhists and Their Tibetan Successors. 
2 vols. Boston: Shambhala.
Studholme, Alexander. 2002. The Origins of O ṃ 
Maṇipadme Hū ṃ: A Study of K āraṇḍavyūha 
Sūtra. Albany: State University of New York 
Press.
Vidyabhusana, Satis Chandra (ed.). 1908. Baud-
dha-Stotra-Saṁgrahaḥ or a Collection of Bud-
dhist Hymns. Volume I: Sragdhar ā-Stotram or 
a Hymn to T ārā in Sragdhar ā Metre by Bhik ṣu 
Sarvaj ña Mitra of Ka śmīra. With the Sanskrit 
Commentary of Jina Rak ṣita, together with two 
Tibetan Versions. Calcutta: The Asiatic Society 
of Bengal.
Vincent, Brice, David Bourgarit and Paul Jett. 2012. 
‘Khmer Bronze Metallurgy during the Angko-
rian Period (Twelfth to Thirteenth Centuries): 
Technical Investigation of a New Selected 
Corpus of Artifacts from the National Museum 
of Cambodia, Phnom Penh’, in Paul Jett, Blythe 
McCarthy, and Janet G. Douglas (eds.), Scien-
tific Research on Ancient Asian Metallurgy: 
Proceedings of the Fifth Forbes Symposium at 
the Freer Gallery of Art, pp. 124–153. London: Archetype Publications/The Freer Gallery of 
Art, Smithsonian Institution.
Wayman, Alex. 1973. The Buddhist Tantras: Light on 
Indo-Tibetan Esotericism. New York: S. Weiser. 
. 1977. Yoga of the Guhyasam ājatantra: The 
Arcane Lore of Forty Verses; 
a Buddhist Tantra 
Commentary. 1st ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Woodward, Hiram W. 1979. ‘The Bàyon-Period 
Buddha Image in the Kimbell Art Museum’, 
Archives of Asian Art 32: 72–83.
. 1980. ‘Some Buddha Images and the Cul-
tural Developments of the Late Angkorian 
Period’, Artibus Asiae 42/2–3: 155–174.
. 1981. ‘Tantric Buddhism at Angkor Thom’, 
Ars Orientalis 12: 57–67.
. 1994–95. ‘The Jayabuddhamah ānātha 
Images of Cambodia’, Journal of the Walters 
Art Gallery 52/53: 105–111.
. 2004. ‘Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia 
in the Light of Recent Scholarship’, Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies 35/2: 329–354.
. 2007. ‘The Karandavyuha Sutra and Bud-
dhist Art in 10th Century Cambodia’, in Prat-
apaditya Pal (ed.), Buddhist Art: Form & 
Meaning, pp. 70–83. Mumbai: Marg Publica -
tions. 
. 2015. ‘Aspects of Buddhism in Tenth-Cen-
tury Cambodia’, in D. Christian Lammerts (ed.),  
Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early 
Modern Southeast Asia , pp. 218–260. Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
05_CreSouthV1_9P_11Feb22.indd   191 11/2/22   3:34 PM

--- [Page 194] ---
Chapter 6
Dancers, Musicians, Ascetics, and Priests:  
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development  
in the Temple Cults of Angkor1
introduction
Śaivism was the dominant Indic religious 
tradition in the ancient Khmer domains 
in the early mediaeval period (ca. 7th–13 th 
century CE). The ideologies and ritual practices of 
its various currents, from the Atimārga or Pāśu -
pata Śaivism (flourished ca. 3rd–8 th century) to 
the Mantramārga or tantric Śaivism (flourished 
ca. 7th–13 th century),2 inspired the extant corpus 
of Sanskrit and Old Khmer inscriptions as well as 
the regions’ temple architecture.
1. While this chapter specifically focuses on perfor -
mance-related practices in Khmer temples, some parts re -
garding Pāśupata practices in the ancient Khmer domains 
have been previously published in Chemburkar and Kapoor 
2018; see also Chemburkar 2015 for references to dancers 
in Khmer inscriptions and temple iconography, especial -
ly under Jayavarman VII, and Chapter 7 in this volume 
for a possible Pāśupata origin of Khmer temples’ ‘annex 
buildings’. I owe special thanks to Andrea Acri for the 
helpful discussions on the subject of performers and their 
religious affiliations, for his inspiring work on the subject, 
and for being a most attentive and helpful editor. I also 
thank Olivier Cunin for generously sharing his breadth of 
knowledge on the Khmer temples, and Shivani Kapoor and 
Peter Sharrock for tirelessly reading and commenting on 
previous drafts of this chapter. All the images reproduced 
here are mine except otherwise specified.
2.  The Mantramārga was less severe in terms of asceticism 
and more oriented towards (state-sponsored) ritualism 
than the Atimārga; the two movements also differed with 
regard to their conception of initiation, being a funda -
mentally transformative and purifying act for the former, 
and a mere rite de passage for the latter. A succinct and 
authoritative characterization of these traditions is the 
seminal article by Sanderson (1988); on their respective 
textual corpora, see Sanderson 2012–2013.Swati Chemburkar
The Pāśupata movement was one of the earliest 
organized and widely distributed ascetic orders 
of Śaivism. The Brahmins of this sect left signif -
icant traces of their presence across the subcon -
tinent and also secured a prominent position in 
the ancient Khmer, Cam, and Javanese domains.3 
One of their most characteristic traits was the in-
corporation of song and dance into observance 
(vrata), both within and without temples.  The key 
text Pāśupatasūtra indicates that the initial system -
atic inclusion of song and dance in ascetic obser-
vance can be traced to the Pāñcārthika tradition, 
whose earliest textual sources date back to ca. 4th 
or 5th centuries CE.4 An association with perfor -
mance may also be detected among the various 
sub-traditions that sprung up within the Pāśupa -
ta fold, including the Lākulas and the Kāpālikas/
Kālamukhas,5 as well as the elusive ‘Siddhas’, who  
 
3. Early scholarship on the history of the Pāśupatas is 
that of D.R. Bhandarkar (1908) and R.G. Bhandarkar (1913), 
Banerjea (1941, 1951), Pathak (1960), and Hara (1966); recent 
scholarship is that of Bakker (2000, 2014), Bisschop (2006, 
2010), and Acharya (2006, 2007, 2018). Relevant contribu -
tions on Pāśupata Śaivism in the ancient Khmer domains 
are those by Bhattacharya (1955), Sanderson (2003–2004), 
and Goodall (2015).
4. On the basis of the exposition of the Gaṇakārikā  and it s 
commentary Ratnaṭīkā , we can infer that the Pāñcārthika 
tradition recognized five principles ( pañcārtha ), namely 
effect ( kārya ), cause ( kāraṇa ), a prescribed set of rules 
(vidhi ), attainment of union with the Lord ( yoga ), and the 
end of suffering ( duḥkhānta ). 
5. See Acri 2018. On the various sub-sects and histori -
cal developments of Pāśupatism, see Jash 1974: 61–79 and 
Bakker 2000.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   192 11/2/22   3:36 PM

--- [Page 195] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor193
appear to have taken up some of the antinomian 
behaviours of the Pāśupatas.6 
While the Pāñcārthika Pāśupata system was 
characterized by an ascetic character, early ref-
erences to this sect in the epigraphical records 
document endowments for temples, and ‘refer 
to Pāśupatas as recipients for the performance of 
worship in the temples’ (Bisschop 2010 : 485).7 It 
has, thus, become increasingly clear that, fairly 
soon in the history of the order, some Pāśupatas 
started to perform temple rituals, thereby obtain-
ing royal support. The performing arts, including 
singing and dancing, seem to have played a role 
in their modes of worship. These may then have 
been carried forward and further developed by the 
Mantramārga throughout the mediaeval period in 
Śaiva temples and monasteries in both the Indian 
subcontinent and Southeast Asia.
This chapter documents and re-examines the 
Śaiva ritual practices enjoining performance in 
the mediaeval Khmer domains. It combines data 
mined from the Śaiva textual archive in Sanskrit 
and vernacular languages with hitherto neglect-
ed art historical material from the ancient Khmer 
domains, as well as insights from Campā, Java, and 
South India.8 
Following on from Bhattacharya’s (1955 ) pio-
neering work on Pāśupatism in the ancient Khmer 
domains, this chapter will first discuss the presence 
of this movement in the early Angkorian period and 
its survival as an elite corp of state-sponsored ritu-
alists through the Angkorian period. Then, starting 
from the reflections by Ronald Davidson (2002 ), 
who accords a major historical role to the Pāśupa-
6. On Siddhas, see Davidson 2002 and Samuel 2006. On 
the trope of Siddhas portrayed as evil ascetics or sorcerers 
fond of singing, dancing, and consuming alcohol in the 
company of women in mediaeval Indic Sanskrit literature, 
see Bloomfield 1924.
7. For instance, the 4th-century Bāgh copper plates (nos. 
III, V, VI, IX, X, XII and XIV) refer to Pāśupatas as recipients 
of grants for the performance of temple worship (Ramesh 
and Tewari 1990); the Mallar copper plate grants of Śiva-
gupta Bālārjuna (ca. 7th century) mention the involvement 
of Pāśupata saint Aghorajyotis in the proceedings of the 
Śiva Bāleśvara shrine (Shastri 1995, vol. 2: 380–382).
8. For the iconography of Pāśupata ascetics in the Khmer 
domains, see Kapoor 2019: 122–131 and Chemburkar and 
Kapoor 2018: 45–57.tas as the ritual agents who first developed music, 
song, and drama in the Indic religious landscape,9 
it will focus on the evidence of performance-based 
worship by Pāśupata agents in the Khmer domains, 
and finally describe the development of perfor -
mance in Śaiva and Buddhist temples and festi-
vals in Śaiva Mantramārga and even Buddhist 
(e.g., in the case of Jayavarman VII) milieus in the 
late Angkorian period. The aim is to assemble the 
multifarious and fragmentary evidence scattered 
across both South and Southeast Asia that could 
help us to form a more authentic appreciation of 
the religious landscape of the premodern societies 
under study, so as to reach a richer perception of 
how the sect functioned beyond the dimension of 
prescriptive texts in its various geographical and 
socio-cultural contexts.
the pāśupatas: from the indian 
subcontinent to the khmer domains
Pāśupata adepts worshipped Śiva under the name 
Paśupati, Lord (pati ) of cattle (paśu , also in the 
sense of ‘sentient beings/bound souls’). The ascetic 
path of the sect followed five stages, in which the 
practitioners were to live in five different places: 
in a temple, among people, in an empty cave, in a 
cremation ground, and ultimately becoming one 
with Rudra (Śiva) (Acharya 2018 ). The first stage 
of practice included bathing and lying in ash, and 
worshipping Śiva—presumably the liṅga—with 
singing, dancing, laughing, reciting mantras, 
and so on. During the second stage, while living 
amongst people, Pāśupatas exhibited hedonistic 
and debased behaviour such as pretending to be 
asleep, being paralysed, walking as if crippled, con-
suming alcohol or exhibiting signs of lust at the 
9. See Davidson 2002: 223: ‘the Pāśupatas are the prob -
able s
ource for the employment of song and dance in the 
Buddhist forms of worship […]. The Pāśupatas particu -
larly enjoyed the use of song and dramatic forms in the 
worship of Śiva, and this emphasis occurs from the earliest 
documents right through the life of the order. […] Their 
virtuosity in vocal song and structured forms of dance 
were perhaps an extension of their involvement in court 
life and missionary activity.’
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   193 11/2/22   3:36 PM

--- [Page 196] ---
Swati Chemburkar194
sight of woman.10 These unorthodox and outland-
ish ascetic practices might explain why references 
to Pāśupatas in Indian mediaeval Sanskrit literature 
are often hostile.
Several Sanskrit inscriptions testify to the fact 
that Pāśupata ascetics spread from North India to 
Nepal, Bengal, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and over-
seas to Southeast Asia. Inscriptions from the Khmer 
and Cam domains mention Pāśupata masters or 
refer to typically Pāśupata forms of Śiva, doctrines, 
and practices,11 which are in harmony with those 
described in the seminal Pāśupatasūtra (with the 
commentary Pañcārthabhāṣya) and Gaṇakārikā 
(with the commentary Ratnaṭīkā), as well as other 
transmitted literature in Sanskrit.12 
Alexis Sanderson (2003– 2004 : 403) notes 
that the re-creation of a Śaiva landscape of Indic 
sacred sites in Kambujadeśa is seen as early as 6th 
century CE, and many names of Śaiva sites and 
sanctuaries recorded in pre-Angkorian inscrip-
tions are borrowed from Indian holy places that 
were associated with Pāśupatism.13 Vṛddheśvara in 
10. Some of these behaviours became (proverbially) asso -
ciated with the Kāpālikas, a sect that probably developed 
from Pāśupata Śaivsim. The farcical drama Mattavilāsa-  
prahasana , composed in Kāñcī in the 7th century, portrays 
three characters—a Pāśupata by the name of Babhrukalpa, 
the Kāpālika Satyasoma (addressed as a Mahāpāśupata), 
and his partner, a dancing Kāpālinī called Devasomā. It 
describes how the hedonist couple was engaged in wild 
dances, consumed meat and alcohol, and enjoyed sexual 
intercourse (Lorenzen 2000: 82).
11. From the Khmer domains, see inscriptions K. 604,  
v. 12 ( IC, IV: 17–19), K. 733, v. 4 ( IC, I: 3), K. 80 ( IC, VI: 3), 
K. 258, face CII, st. 21 ( IC, IV: 175), K. 13 (Barth 1885: 13 and 
Bhattacharya 2009: 22), K. 701 (Cœdès 1932: 84–112), K. 364 
(Finot 1912: 1–28), K. 1049, st. III (Goodall 2015: 12), K. 1155 
(Estève 2009: 518–523). From the Cam domains, see the 
Mỹ Sơn stele inscription of Vikrāntavarman (no. 17, v. IV, 
line 12, Finot 1904: 930; Majumdar 1927: 31–35), the Bang 
An stele inscription of Bhadravarman III (no. 42, v. VI, 
line 24; Huber 1911: 9; Majumdar 1927: 128), 9th-century 
Po-Nagar inscription of Vikrāntavarman II (no. 30, v. III 
and IV, Majumdar 1927: 71–74), and the stele of Glai Lomov 
(Bergaigne  1893: 226, 393B line 2; cf. Bhattacharya 1955: 481), 
mentioning white ashes, yoga, muttering, huṃkāra , and 
becoming one with Rudra ( sitabhasmaprabhāvayogādi -
japahuṅkāranirmmalataraśarīrapradeśa ). 
12. For a brief account of Pāśupata and Pāśupata-influ -
enced literature, see Chapter 7 of this volume, fn. 35.
13. Sande
rson (2003–2004: 405–406) traces at least nine -Kārohaṇa (Karvan), the supposed place of Rudra’s 
incarnation as Lakulīśa—the originator of the 
Pāśupata teaching—is also found in Khmer epig-
raphy.14 Bhadreśvara, the benevolent form of Śiva 
well known in Indian sources, became the state 
God of the Khmers at Wat Phu and Sambor Prei 
Kuk, but also of the Cams across the mountains 
at Mỹ Sơn, playing a similar role to Śiva Naṭarāja 
of Cidambaram for the Tamils, and Paśupati of 
Deopatan for the people of Kathmandu. In fact, an 
inscription from Khmer king Dharaṇīndravarman 
(r. 1107 –1113) equates Bhadreśvara with Paśupati.15
Particularly noted for their accumulated 
knowledge in a vast array of subjects such as de-
bating and teaching skills, and maybe also magical 
powers aiming at securing success in battle for 
their kings and patrons, Pāśupata masters must 
have been revered in the Khmer domains. Some 
were placed in charge of temples, and many re-
ceived land grants.16 By the 7 th century, Pāśupata 
teachers had secured a place at the Khmer court 
and were also involved in the worship activi-
ties that were carried out at the temples of their 
patrons, as evident from the early Sambor Prei 
Kuk inscription of 627  CE:17
dvijaf pāśupato rājñādhikṛto devatārccane 
idan devakulaṃ bhoktum arhaty ābhūta-  
saṃplavam
 A Pāśupata Brahmin appointed by the king for 
the service of the god must enjoy the benefits of 
this temple till the end of the world. 
teen doubles of the Śivas of which the first eight are Pāśupa -
tas, and included Amareśvara, Prabhāsa and Siddheśvara. 
Vickery’s analysis (1998: 140–141) of some two-hundred 
pre-Angkorian inscriptions observes fifty names—most 
ending in Īśvara—that seem to be Śaiva, fourteen Vaiṣṇava, 
and eight Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava combined. 
14. Vṛddh
eśvara as a Śaiva god/shrine occurs in K. 374, 
vv. 3, 8 ( IC, VI: 251), K. 33, v. 24 ( IC, III: 148), and K. 284, 
v. 4 ( IC, III: 107). The word occurs in K. 388B, v. 11 and  
K. 550, v. 2, possibly in Buddhist context or as an ‘ancient’, 
pre-Indic god (see Vickery 1998: 146–148).
15. K. 258C
, v. 2 ( IC, IV: 175).
16. K. 81, v. 3
3 (Barth 1885: 19); K. 437, vv. 5–7 ( IC, IV: 32); 
K. 44, vv. 4–5 ( IC, II: 12)
17. K. 604 ( IC, IV: 17 ); for the Sanskrit text, see Finot 1928: 
43–46.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   194 11/2/22   3:36 PM

--- [Page 197] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor195
pāśupata brahmins: an elite class?
There is no doubt that Pāśupatas became key agents 
in Khmer royal courts, obtaining the confidence 
of the kings. The Sambor Prei Kuk inscriptions 
of Īśānavarman I (r. 617–635) entrust Pāśupata 
Vidyāviśeṣa with the care of a temple,18 and those 
of Bhāvavarman II (r.?–c. 657) mention the em-
ployment of a Śaiva ascetic named Vidyāpuṣpa as 
a poet.19 K. 523 mentions an endowment to Śiva by 
the tapasvin Vidyāspada. These priestly names be-
ginning with Vidyā are typically Pāśupata in both 
India and the Khmer domains.20 Khmer epigraphy 
also attests the names commencing with Bhā- or 
Bhāva- such as Bhāvaruci, Bhāpuṣpa, Bhāvajñāna, 
which were possibly Pāśupatas.21 Vickery’s study 
(1998: 103–111) on the regional groups of offi -
cials discusses Poñ and Mrātan as elite class people. 
These titles are always accompanied by Pāśupata 
names such as (Poñ) Bhākumāra, (Poñ) Bhāpuṣpa 
or (Mrātan) Bhāprasanna with few exceptions, and 
always with respect to the donations of person -
nel to Śiva or a liṅga. This suggests that Pāśupata 
agents formed an elite circle within Khmer courts 
at least up to the 7th century. 
The names ending in -rāśi, such as Tejorāśi and 
Śivarāśi, might also be suggestive of the continuing 
of the Pāśupata tradition in the Khmer domains as 
Bakker (2014: 175) argues that these were Pāśupa-
ta post-initiatory names. For instance, one Brah -
18. K. 604, v. 12 (IC , IV:  17–19).
19. K. 733 ( IC, I: 3
). It mentions Pāśupata ascetic Vidyā- 
puṣpa, a learned poet consecrated a silver praṇālika  and 
practices of austerities ( tapas ) in conformity with Śaiva 
doctrine. Cf. Bhattacharya 1955: 480–487.
20. See Estève 2009: 475 (cf. 547–551), relating an infor -
mation by Goodall. Other relevant names are Vidyākīrti 
(K. 127, IC , II: 89), Vidyādeva (K. 80, IC , VI: 3), Vidyāvindu 
(K. 13, ISC , no V, p. 31), Vidyāpuṣpa (K. 733, IC , I: 3), and 
Vidyāvinaya (K. 54, IC , III: 157). However, Zakharov (2019) 
has argued that vidyā  was popular in ancient Cambodia 
and does not necessarily denote a Pāśupata.
21. On the basis of his study of Śaiva cult in northern India, 
Pathak (1960: 19, fn. 2) argues that ascetics of Praṇāma and 
Ananta gotras of the Pāśupata sect bore names beginning 
with Bhāva-, such as Bhāvavālmīki, Bhāvatejas, Bhāvodyota. 
Estéve (2009: 476–480) and Goodall (2015: 26–27) support 
this view. Vickery (1998: 152, fn. 53) says: ‘probably the 
element bha should be bhā, occurring in several elite titles 
but not yet understood’.maṇarāśika had occupied an important place in 
Jayavarman III’s court (r. 835–877).22 Many ascet-
ics with names ending in -rāśi lived in Varanasi, a 
city whose connection with the Pāśupata religion 
is found until the 12th century (ibid.: 30). The 
pre-Angkorian tradition of names beginning with 
Bhā-/Bhāva-/Vidyā- or ending in -rāśi continued 
during the reign of Indravarman I (r. 877–889), 
and Yaśovarman I (r. 889–ca. 910). Later, especially 
during the 10th century, names ending in -śiva 
such as Jyotiśiva, Varmaśiva, and Sadāśiva became 
more common, and Goodall (2015: 25) notes that 
these are indicative of Śaiva tantric Mantramārga 
traditions;23 at the same time, he suggests that ‘this 
does not necessarily mean that we can conclude 
with certainty that the Mantram ārga only reached 
the Khmers in the Angkorian period’ (ibid.: 25–26). 
Along similar lines, Sanderson (2003–2004: 444) 
points out that certain iconographical elements 
found in Mantramārgic sources from the subconti -
nent are already attested among the Khmers in the 
7th century, ‘well before the Mantram ārga reached 
their shores’. 
The Prasat Prei inscription of Yaśovarman I 
mentions Śaiva and Pāśupata ācāryas side by side, 
and differentiate them from Brahmins:
Immediately after the Brahmin, one honours 
the Śaiva master and the Pāśupata master, and 
whichever of those is instructed in grammar, 
he will be honoured more than the others. Pre -
ferred among those who know in depth the 
doctrine of the Śaivas and the Pāśupatas, sci -
ence and grammar, is the master who teaches 
them, who will be honoured to the highest de -
gree in this excellent hermitage.24
22. K. 449, st. 24–25 (Cœdès 1913: 29, 34); compare Estève 
2009: 486. Ācārya Tejorāśi is mentioned in 9th-century K. 
233B, stanza 16 (Cœdès 1954: 63), and in early 10th-century 
K. 262S, stanza 9; K. 263B, stanza 44; and K. 263D, stanza 
37 (IC, IV: 108). Śivarāśi is mentioned in 11th-century K. 
258B, stanza 60; K. 258C, stanza 50 ( IC, IV: 175).
23. For a dis
cussion of what appear to be Pāśupata/Śaiva 
Saiddhāntika names in Cambodian inscriptions, see Estève 
(2009: 475–488) and Goodall (2015: 20–25).
24. K. 279 (B
ergaigne 1893, nos. LVI–LX, C1, vv. 6, 7, 10, 
pp. 243, 248, 423, 428; Cœdès 1932: 97–103).
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   195 11/2/22   3:36 PM

--- [Page 198] ---
Swati Chemburkar196
After Y aśovarman, the Pāśupatas seem to have 
remained relatively influential as 11 th-century 
Khmer epigraphy mentions Paśupati (as visible 
on mount Bhadreśvara)25 and the influential priest 
Divākara making offerings to Paśupati (a liṅga?) 
as part of the royal coronation of Sūryavarman 
II at Phnom Sandak (K. 194) and at Preah Vihear 
(K. 383).26 Sanderson has convincingly argued that 
Mantramārga Śaivism took over in the public/royal 
worship, but it is also possible that Pāśupata beliefs, 
rituals, and modes of worship were absorbed into 
the Mantramārga and, perhaps, adopted by sub -
sequent generations of local practitioners and re -
configured as inherently ‘Khmer’ .27 Furthermore, 
Pāśupata cultic agents and their subgroups would 
have remained integrated into the Khmer court 
irrespective of the primary religious affiliations of 
the kings. The temple epigraphy of the late Angko-
rian period does not expressly mention Pāśupata 
ascetics, but it still mentions Paśupati and offer -
ings being made to it. Zhou Daguan, who spent a  
year (1296 –1297 ) in Angkor as an envoy of Temur 
Khan of the Yuan dynasty, mentions banjie  (as 
learned men or paṇḍitas/Brahmins), zhugu  (as 
Buddhist monks) and Śaiva ascetics as Basiwei 
or Pa-sseu-wei (Pāśupata? Tapasvins?) wearing a 
tall headdress (jaṭā?), making offerings to stones 
(liṅgas?) as opposed to icons, and wearing red or 
white cloth on their head (Harris 2007 : 52, 53, 104). 
Some of the ascetics in the historical parade scene 
depicted on the southern gallery of Angkor Wat 
might be Pāśupatas, as suggested by Cœdès (1911 b: 
201), in the light of Daguan’s description.28
25. K. 364, v. 49 (Finot 1912: 27); K. 258C, v. 21 ( IC, IV: 18 6).
26. Cœdès and Dupont 1943: 134.
27. It is ofte
n difficult to know to what degree the Śaiva 
beliefs were Indian and to what degree they were specific 
to Khmers. Maxwell (2008: 74) argues that ‘we should not 
expect to find Indian Hinduism, or Indian Buddhism, in 
Cambodia of Jayavarman VII—or even, perhaps in Funan.’
28. There are two types of ascetics depicted on this wall: 
the one wearing a very high, beehive-like bun, and the 
other wearing a fabric cap ending with a knot enclosing 
the bun. The fabric cap would be indicative of Pāśupatas, 
who used to wear red or white cloth on their head (see 
Harris 2007: 53). pāśupata textual accounts of 
performance-based worship
The Pāśupatasūtra with the Pañcārthabhāṣỵa 
(ed. Sastri 1940) and the Gaṇakārikā with the 
Ratnaṭīkā (ed. Dalal 1966) mention the process 
(vidhi) for the attainment of liberation through 
five main sacred acts in the first stage of the adept’s 
ascetic career, when he lives in the temple. From 
the Pāśupatasūtra (verses 1.7 to 1.9) we learn that 
his observances are as follows: purifying himself 
by the besmearing with ashes three times a day 
(bhasmanā snānam),29 sleeping in ashes, supple -
mentary bath with ash, wearing a single garment, 
and finally wearing flowers that had been offered 
to the deity (nirmālya). He resides in the temple 
(āyatana), the holy place of Maheśvara, and serves 
the Lord with the offerings of laughing, singing, 
dancing, making the sound hu ḍu(k), making in -
ternal salutations, and mantra recitations (hasi-
ta-gīta-nṛtya-ḍuṃḍuṃkāra-namaskāra-japyopa-
hārenopatiṣṭhet, Pāśupatasūtra 1.8).
The Ratnaṭīkā (Dalal 1966 : 17–19) illustrates 
the procedure: the aspirant walks to the temple 
after the ash bath, chanting the Sadyojāta mantra, 
and bowing to Śiva. He then proceeds to the inte-
rior, where he kneels to the right of the image (da-
kṣiṇāmūrti), laughing loudly (hasita), singing (gīta), 
dancing (nṛtya), producing the auspicious sound 
of huḍukkāra or ḍuṃḍuṃkāra like the bellowing 
of a bull, produced by the contact of the tongue-tip 
with the palate. In this way, he circles around the 
deity three times and completes his inner worship 
(namaskāra) with single-minded concentration 
on the meaning of each successive syllable. Songs 
are played according to the Brahmanical rules of 
Gāndharvaśāstra, in which stories relating to Śiva 
are sung in public, while dance is performed ac -
cording to the Nāṭyaśāstra, which comprises all 
possible gestures of the hands and feet.30 
29. On bhasmasnāna , se e Chapter 7 of this volume,  
pp. 240–244. 
30. If we app
ly the reading adopted by Hara (1966: 182) 
in Pañcārthabhāṣya  on Pāśupatasūtra  1.8 (Sastri 1940: 13, 
lines 14–16). For the view that the music and dance to be 
performed not in strict accordance with Gāndharvaśās -
tra and Nāṭyaśāstra , see Törzsök 2016: 460; Acri 2018: 4. 
Given the ambiguous nature of these rare references, it is 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   196 11/2/22   3:36 PM

--- [Page 199] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor197
We may compare the above with the account 
of early Śaiva practice found in the Niśvāsamukha, 
the introductory book of the early Mantramārga 
scripture Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, large sections of 
which show traces of Pāśupata Śaivism. To the 
sages who ask how liṅga worship is to be per -
formed, and question the benefits of partaking in 
the same through dancing, singing, playing the lute 
(tantrīvādya), and making the sound huḍu(k), Śiva 
reveals that the sages will obtain the same infinite 
pleasures as the Gaṇas, the members of the retinue 
of the Lord, who reside with him on Mount Kailā-
sa.31 Commenting on Niśvāsamukha 1.169 , Acri 
(2018 : 3) observes that those performance-based 
acts of worship seem to have been the preserve 
of both lay people and initiated into the Śaiva  
(i. e. Pāśupata?) system, and that the latter received 
an even greater benefit from them—i.e., liberation 
(apavārga). 
References to the musical and dramatic accom-
plishments of Pāśupatas and Kālamukhas, often 
carried out in a context of public religion and 
temple-based worship, are found in some Indian 
inscriptions.32 Furthermore, there are frequent 
difficult to determine how exactly the dance and music 
were performed. 
31. Niśvāsamukha  1.73 –76, 1.166–167, 4.72 (Kafle 2020: 
255–257, 276, 353).
32. The important role of the Pāśupata community is 
confirmed by the Kālañjar stone inscription of Kīrtivar -
man’s reign (1090 CE) found in the Nīlakaṇṭha temple in 
Karnataka, mentioning the kings’ Śaiva guru Vāsudeva 
as the builder of a maṇḍapa  that was possibly meant to 
house the dance and music worship of the order (Trivedi 
1978: 370). Dancers and musicians are mentioned in the 
grants of Śaiva temples associated with Kālamukha priests: 
see, e.g., the grant to Kedāreśvara temple by Hoysala king 
Vīra-Ballāla (Rice 1902: 76, inscription ŚK 105). A 12th-cen -
tury inscription in the same temple praises its  ācārya as 
being  pre-eminent in drama and the science of music, while 
another 11th-century inscription attributes the same qual -
ities to Śrīkaṇṭhapaṇḍita, disciple of Kedāraśaktimunipati 
(Rice 1902: 59–61, inscriptions ŚK 92 and 94; cf. Lorenzen 
1991: 127). Many more inscriptions mention priests of pos -
sible Kālamukha affiliation: see, e.g., the 1059–1060 CE 
Nāgeśvara temple inscription from Someśvara I’s reign at 
Sudi (Karnataka), mentioning the ‘ones acting for the god’s 
enjoyment and dancers graced the four pillars’ (vv. 6, 7, 13), 
and the beneficiary assigned to the performance rituals in 
the temple, which include Someśvara I, a flute player and 
dancing women (Barnett 1925); and an inscription dated mentions of Pāśupatas in Sanskrit literature in 
association with a colourful landscape of dancers, 
musicians, ascetics, hermits, and courtesans. For 
instance, already in the Meghad ūta by Kālidāsa (ca. 
5th century), we find a mention of certain veśyās or 
dancing-girls/courtesans at the famous Mahākāla 
temple of Ujjain, one of the major and most ancient 
Pāśupata sacred sites (verse 35); the word veśyā 
is interpreted by 10 th-century Kashmirian com -
mentator Vallabhadeva as bhagavadga ṇikāḥ, ‘the 
courtesans of the Lord’ (Goodall 2018 : 93; cf. infra). 
The 8th-century novel Kuṭṭanīmata by Kashmirian 
Dāmodaragupta exposes the whole craft of courte-
sans in the form of a dialogue between a novice and 
an experienced one. Ascetics figure predominantly 
in the colourful world of courtesans. A verse (539 , 
Goodall and Dezső 2012 : 210–211 ) makes fun of 
the fondness of Bhāvaśuddha (a Pāśupata ācārya 
from Varanasi) for the dancing girl Anaṅgadevī, 
for whom he has built a mansion. Another one 
(753, ibid.: 282–283 ) calls a courtesan ācāryanī, as 
a result of her closeness to Pāśupatācārya Bhāśud-
dha—presumably, the same Pāśupata ācārya men-
tioned in verse 539 . The text (v. 743 , ibid.: 278–279 ) 
also mentions a devadāsī at the Gambhīreśvara 
temple at Varanasi. Kṣemendra’s 11 th-century 
satire, Samayamātṛkā (The Courtesan’s Keeper), 
refers to an ascetic with piled-up hair (jaṭādhārī) 
named Līlāśiva, who visits a courtesan (gaṇikā) at 
night and in the morning avoiding the main street 
to reach his maṭha.33 Merutuṅga’s 10 th-century 
Prabandhacintāmaṇi (Part 1, Mūlarājaprabandha, 
v. 15; trans. Tawney 1901 : 26) narrates an episode 
where Solanki King Mūlarāja searches for a tapas-
vin to take care of the Śiva temple; the tapasvin 
Vayajalladeva agrees on the condition that Mūlarā -
ja supplied him daily with saffron, musk, camphor 
1055 CE from Kādambeśvara temple at Bantapur, Dharwar, 
Karnataka, listing the grants made to temple girls, dance 
master, the keeper of the temple girls, musicians and drum -
mers (Barnett 1915–1916: 175).
33. Samayamātṛkā of Kṣe mendra (part 6, verse 9), see 
Pandit and Parab (1925: 40). Names ending in -śiva usually 
denote a Mantramārga rather than Atimārga (i.e. Pāśupata) 
affiliation, but the relevant point here is that the character in 
question is supposed to be an ascetic, as the term jaṭadhārī  
and the reference to his residing in a maṭha  would seem 
to suggest.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   197 11/2/22   3:36 PM

--- [Page 200] ---
Swati Chemburkar198
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   198 11/2/22   3:36 PM

--- [Page 201] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor199
Fig. 6.1: (a) The liṅga pedestal of Mỹ Sơn E1 temple on the top as displayed at the Da Nang museum, depicting 
the activities of various ascetics (photo: Tran Ky Phuong). Particulars of the pedestal: top row from left to right: 
ascetics in the forest or hermitage setting and conversing or teaching (b–d); second row: ascetic in the forest or 
hermitage setting, meditating with a rosary in hand and playing a musical instrument (e–g); third row: bearded 
ascetic kneels before a yoni and lustrates a liṅga while his disciple is carrying an offering tray (h) + ascetic with 
a disciple (i); fourth row: ascetic holding a book (l), ascetic (m), ascetics playing a flute (n) and a three-stringed 
instrument (o); bottom row: ascetics playing flute, drums, and dancing (p) (photos: Paisarn Piammattwat).
and thirty-two women, as well as a white umbrella 
and a land grant, clearly indicating the lax moral 
atmosphere of the temple and the luxurious life 
led by ascetics. 
art historical evidence of  
pāśupata temple-worship from 
southeast asia
Visual and epigraphic evidence suggests that Pāśu-
pata Brahmins in the Khmer courts may have participated in dance- and music-based temple 
worship. The Mỹ Sơn E1 temple pedestal from early 
8th-century Campā (Fig. 6.1 ) is significant as its 
relief carvings show ascetics—probably Pāśupa -
tas—performing meditation, preaching, conversing, 
dancing, playing musical instruments, and holding 
a book. It gives us a unique glimpse of the daily practices of Śaiva ascetics,34 and since these activi-
ties are depicted on the pedestal that hosted a liṅga, 
it can be assumed that they have an implied asso-
ciation with the liṅga and its worship.35 The book 
carried by an ascetic figure on the pedestal, and 
other such ascetic figures on Khmer temple reliefs 
(Fig. 6.2 ), has been recently interpreted by Chem-
burkar and Kapoor (2018 : 51) as an emblem of the 
Pāśupatas—possibly a copy of the Pāśupatasūtra 
itself, which might have represented a seal of their 
missionary nature and their role in the transmis -
sion of Śaiva knowledge.36
34. For a detailed account of the art historical evidence 
of Pāś
upata practices as depicted in Khmer temple reliefs, 
such as Pre Rup and East Mebon, see Chemburkar and 
Kapoor 2018; cf. Haendel 2005: 213–252.
35. On the importance of liṅga  for t he Pāśupatas, see R.G. 
Bhandarkar 1913: 119–124; Chakraborti 1970: 194–203.
36. The existence of the Pāśupatasūtra in Cambodia is 
suggested by some echoes of that text found in Sanskrit 
inscriptions from Cambodia, e.g. K. 1049 (see Goodall 2015). 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   199 11/2/22   3:36 PM

--- [Page 202] ---
Swati Chemburkar200
Fig. 6.2: Ascetic figures seen holding a book at 11th-century Baphuon temple, Enclosure III, southern 
gopura -inner side facing north (a); 12 th-century Angkor Wat, South western corner pavilion (b); late 
12th–13 th century Bayon, inner gallery, south wall between BY25  and BY26  (c), and Banteay Chhmar, 
east gallery, north BC 162  temple (d).
Long-haired, bearded holy men are depicted 
on a sandstone lintel from the ‘S’ and ‘N’ group of 
Śaiva temples of Sambor Prei Kuk. One such lintel 
depicts six ascetics with tied up or braided hair and 
beards, wearing simple dhotis and sacred threads, 
playing instruments, and dancing ecstatically in 
celebration (Fig. 6 .3). 
Given the importance for the Pāśupatas of the 
observance of bathing in ashes, as well as the clean-
ing of the hair-bun with ashes, it does not seem 
far-fetched to identify the ascetics depicted on the 
Sambor Prei Kuk lintel, whose hair is tied up in buns, as Pāśupatas. This view is also supported by 
inscription K. 279, mentioning the quantity of ash 
needed for ācāryas and elderly ascetics of a brāh-
maṇāśrama, to be identified as Pāśupatas, to clean 
their buns (jaṭāśuddhi).37
37. See Cœdès’ table (1932: 97–108) comparing the in -
scriptions issued by Yaśovarman I (r. 889–c. 910) mention-
ing these āśramas (at, respectively, Prasat ong Mong [K. 
290], Prāsāt Komnap [K. 701], Prei Prāsāt [K. 279]). Estève 
(2009: 339–345) has added another Śaiva āśrama inscription  
(K. 1228) to the table, and argued that both the brāhmaṇāśra-
ma and the śaivāśrama hosted Pāśupata ascetics. 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   200 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 203] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor201
An early image of Khmer kings and their 
Brahmin priests is found on a 7 th-century lintel 
from Wat Eng Khna (Fig. 6.4 ), where a group of 
men identifiable as ‘Brahmins’—insofar that they 
are bearded and wear a sacred thread—is per -
forming what may be a consecration ritual for a 
king, seated directly below a śivaliṅga. A group 
of musicians and male dancers accompany these 
Brahmins. On top of the lintel, we see the liṅgod-
bhavamūrti, which narrates the supremacy of the 
liṅga. The intended message seems clear: ‘the newly 
consecrated king ruled with the authority of Śiva, 
invoked according to a ritual enacted for his benefit 
by the ṛṣis’ (Guy 2014 : 166). Given the importance 
of liṅga worship with dance and music rituals for 
the Pāśupatas, we can assume these ascetics to be 
Pāśupatas. Furthermore, it must be pointed out 
that both the communal liṅga-worship and the liṅ-
godbhava myth are described in early, Pāśupata-in -
fluenced Śaiva sources like the Niśvāsamukha and 
the Śivadharma (see Kafle 2013 ; cf. Acri 2018 : 3).38
Pre-Angkorian inscriptions mention donations 
of singers and dancers to Śaiva temples by priests 
38. Sanderson (2003–2004: 422) claims that the Niśvā -
satattvasaṃhitā was known in ancient Cambodia: cf. 
the depiction of thirty-two hells on the walls of Angkor 
Wat. Further, see Goodall and Golzio 2011: 58–59, fn. 10.  
K. 532B, v. 36 (Finot 1925: 359) mentions a Śaiva ascetic 
named Śivācārya mastering two Śaiva treatises, the Niśvāsa  
and Sarvajñānottara  (Chhom 2016: 215).
Fig. 6.3: Lintel depicting Śaiva ascetic celebrants, found at Sambor Prei Kuk- S1, 7th century, National Museum of 
Cambodia, Phnom Penh (Ka. 1748 ). 
and kings.39 This tradition continued during Ang-
korian times, and may reflect cultic and socio-re-
ligious evolutions from an originally Pāśupata tra-
dition to a Mantramārga tradition. According to 
inscription K. 713 , Yaśovarman (889 –910 ) offered 
a great number of beautiful dancers, singers, recit-
ers, musicians and handsome, mature men, skilful 
in dance and other arts, to the temples of Preah 
Kô and Lolei.40 He himself was an accomplished 
dancer.41 Rājendravarman’s guru, Yajñavarāha, 
was well versed in the art of music and drama.42 
Sūryavarman I’s (1011 –1050 ) guru Sadāśiva—a 
typically Saiddhāntika name—was a skilled mu -
sician and donated ‘hundred beautiful women ac-
companied by the wonderful sound of hundred 
39. K. 51 (IC, V: 14); K. 138 (IC, V: 18–19); K. 137 (IC, V: 
115–118); K. 155 (IC, V: 64–68); K. 713 (IC, I: 28); K. 270, vv. 
8–25 (IC, IV: 69–70); K. 600 (IC, II: 21) and K. 323A, v. 63 
(Bergaigne 1893: 391).
40. K. 713, vv. XXXV, XXXVI (Barth 1885: 28) and K. 323A, 
v. 63 (Bergaigne 1893: 399).
41. K. 323A, v. 51 (Barth 1885: 398) and K. 282C, v. 27  
(ibid.: 483).
42. K. 842, v.14 ( IC, I: 14 9). On the basis of this inscription 
where Dāmodara is mentioned as Yajñavarāha’s father 
and the name of a certain Dāmodaram engraved on the 
column of the Virūpākṣa temple in Karnataka, Vasun-
dhara Filliozat (2015: 283) suggests a possible Pāśupata link, 
namely that the former might have been an Indian Pāśupata 
immigrant (inscription no. 10 on a north-eastern pillar, 
western faced, at the eastern entrance of the Lokeśvara 
temple at Virūpākṣa). 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   201 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 204] ---
Swati Chemburkar202
female musicians playing flute and stringed in-
struments, as well as fifty musicians with copper 
cymbals, drums and other percussion instruments’ 
to the temple.43 One of the most celebrated Khmer 
priests, Divākarapaṇḍita, purohita of Jayavarman 
VI (r.1080 –c. 1107 ), Dhāraṇīndravarman (r.1107 –c. 
1113 ), and Sūryavarman II (r.1113 –c. 1150 ), was 
known for installing dancers, singers, musicians 
and jesters as a part of a daily worship at Wat Phu, 
Preah Vihear, and Phnom Sandak as well as ren -
ovating a dance hall. At Preah Vihear, he erected 
a gold image of dancing Śiva.44 Dance- and mu -
sic-based worship remained a significant aspect of 
Khmer temples, as 13th-century Jayavarman VII 
offered two gold dancing Śivas to the śivaliṅga 
installed in the (primarily Buddhist) temple of 
Preah Khan.45 The dancing Śiva remained the most 
common image of Śiva in Khmer reliefs, along with 
Śiva as an ascetic (Roveda 2005 : 163). Jayavarman 
VII installed 615  female dancers in Ta Prohm (a 
Buddhist temple dedicated to his mother),46 1,000  
dancers in the Preah Khan (dedicated to his father), 
and 1,622  dancers in other temples throughout his 
kingdom. Under him, female dancing figures were 
43. K. 235, vv. 72, 112–113 (Finot 1915: 83–88; Cœdès and 
Dupo
nt 1943: 56; Bhattacharya 2009: 123). 
44. K. 235, K
. 194, K. 383 (Cœdès and Dupont 1943).
45. ‘The two Lords of the dance, made of gold, placed 
by the king before the Serpent’ (vv. A 59–60; see Maxwell 
2008: 21 for translation).
46. K. 273, v
v. 64–67, 87 (Cœdès 1906: 77–78).depicted on an unprecedented scale, notably at the 
Bayon, his Buddhist state temple.47 
When one looks at these inscriptional records, 
the offerings of dancers and musicians by the early 
(possibly Pāśupata) ācāryas are intriguing, while 
the donations by later Śaiva rājapurohitas or rāja- 
gurus reflect analogous developments in the Indian 
subcontinent, and especially South India. The fact 
that priests received donations of dancers, singers 
and musicians for the temple opens up a series 
of interesting questions. Who were these ācāryas? 
What was the nature of the relationship—i.e. as 
owner or teachers—between the ācāryas and the 
dancing girls? And, since all the records mention 
‘dancers’ and not just women, female slaves or girls, 
were they already trained or maintained some -
where as dancers? 
Javanese and Khmer art historical material
While it will not be possible to fully answer those 
questions here, an analysis of relevant reliefs on 
Khmer temples and their comparison with ep -
igraphical data is in order. But before doing so, it 
is worth looking at comparative evidence from 
another strongly Śaivized region of Southeast Asia, 
i.e. Java. Enigmatic ascetic figures depicted on the 
walls of some Central Javanese temples as a part of 
dancing scenes featuring female dancers were first 
47. For Preah Khan (v. 76) and Bayon (v. D24), see Maxwell 
2008: 51, 69.
Fig. 6.4 : Lintel depicting the liṅgodbhavamūrti myth and a royal coronation ceremony. Mid-7th century, Wat Eng 
Khna, Central Cambodia, National Museum of Cambodia, Phnom Penh (Ka. 1774 ). 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   202 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 205] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor203
analysed by Willem Stutterheim (1956  [1935 ]). He 
discussed the many ascetic/Brahmanical figures at 
Borobudur and asked ‘what are we to think of this 
holy man, who, judging by his beard, moustache, 
top-knot, [and sacred thread] should be in a her -
mitage rather than in a dancing scene?’ (Stutter -
heim 1956 : 94) (Fig. 6.5 ). 
Ascetic figures also appear on the reliefs of 
Candi Sari and Candi Śiva at Prambanan. Follow-
ing the textual and visual material discussed by 
Stutterheim, Becker (2004 : 176 –177 ) argued:
In addition to the firm textual evidence of their 
presence in Java, there is less-firm but sugges -
tive evidence of the involvement of Pāsupata 
monks in performance traditions. The reliefs of 
a Śaivite priest dancing and singing or reciting 
in the company of dancing women on temple 
reliefs at Borobudur and Prambanan (Stutter -
heim 1956: 93) may indicate Pāsupata monks in 
the “marked” or first stage of spiritual practice.
Acri (2014 ) notes that some characters directly in-
volved in dance, like those depicted on Candi Sari, evidently represent religious figures whose iconog-
raphy corresponds to the Ṛṣi/Pāśupata or Siddha 
typology.48 At the same time, he argues that other 
figures, especially those represented on Borobudur, 
may represent a more general Brahminical type 
associated with dancing girls:
The Brahman appearing in the dancing scenes 
discussed by Stutterheim calls to mind the 
master ( svāmī ), leader ( nāyaka ), or stage di -
rector ( sūtradhāra ) known in classical Indian 
theatre and dance. This figure, who was the 
actual ‘proprietor’ of troupes, took part in the 
performances as lead singer and keeper of the 
rhythm for the dancers ... and may have ful -
filled both functions, i.e. that of the master of 
the troupe/dancing girls and religious practi -
tioner. ( ibid.: 32)
Later ‘survivals’ of religious practitioners of the 
Kāpālika or Siddha type may be the 19 th–20 th-cen-
48. Pāśupatas were undoubtedly an important reality in 
the socio-religious landscape of premodern Java, as they are 
mentioned in many Old Javanese texts; see Acri 2014, 2018.
Fig. 6.5 : Borobudur relief—Third Gallery, north side, west end, III 65 . 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   203 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 206] ---
Swati Chemburkar204
tury officials called chaṇṭang balung s (‘rattling 
bones’), who performed antinomian farces, involv-
ing the drinking of alcohol, and supervised dancing 
girls-cum-prostitutes in the Islamic princely courts 
of Surakarta (Acri 2014 ; Becker 2004 : 178; Stutter -
heim 1956 ).
Returning to the Khmer reliefs, there are many 
parallels with the Javanese material mentioned 
above. Relevant depictions of ascetics or Brahmins 
in the company of women or involved in perfor-
mance scenes are found at 11 th-century Baphuon, 
12th-century Angkor Wat, Phnom Rung, and the 
13th-century Bayon temple.
Three reliefs, one from Angkor Wat and the 
other two from the Bayon, possibly depict ṛṣis in 
a hermitage setting along with women (Figs. 6.6, 
6.7 and 6.8). We may compare this visual evidence 
with the epigraphic record, namely an inscription 
from Yaśovarman’s reign mentioning musicians, 
singers, and instrument players assigned to a Śaiva 
hermitage (āśrama), and specifying that the func-
tionary who acted as the head of Śiva’s worship 
was accompanied by actors,49 presumably for the 
49. See 10th-century Bhadrāśrama inscription K. 450, vv. 
32–42 ( IC, III: 114). 
Fig. 6.6 : Śaiva ascetics are depicted in a hermitage setting in a company of women/dancers on the southwest 
corner pavilion of Angkor Wat. 
staging of a performance as a form ritual. Early 
12th-century inscription K. 364 mentions the 
constant sound of recitation of sacred texts and 
harmony of instrumental music from an āśrama, 
and frequent visits by ṛṣis and apsarases (Finot 
1912: 24, 27). Cœdès’ comparative table on reli -
gious āśramas in Angkor mentioned above refers 
to the fact that relationship with a woman, includ-
ing the legitimate wife, even outside the hermit-
age is strictly prohibited for Viṣṇuite hermits of 
the āśramas, and similar prescriptions applied to 
Buddhist monks;50 however, no such prohibitions 
are prescribed for Śaiva hermits. Does this reflect 
an ideal conduct by Śaiva priests, whereby female 
dancers were regarded as a part of ritual worship 
as the accepted norm? 
The Khmer inscriptional records make it clear 
that these āśramas were far from being simple 
hermitages. In fact, they functioned as monastic 
schools with a significant number of resident Brah-
mins/ascetics and lay people. Did dance and music 
form a part of the curriculum? In order to answer 
this question, it may be worth to draw a compari-
son with India. Śaiva monasteries of Tamil Nadu, 
50. K. 701, v. 84; K. 290, v. 71 (Cœdès 1932: 84–112). 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   204 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 207] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor205
Fig. 6.7 : Śaiva ascetic in a hermitage setting in a company of woman/dancer on the inner gallery-north wall (side 
wall of the BY33 ) of the Bayon. 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   205 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 208] ---
Swati Chemburkar206
Southern India, did include singing and dancing 
along with the teaching of Vedas and Śāstras in 
the late 11 th–early 12th century (see Inscriptions 
nos. 390 and 565  in Annual Report on Indian Epig-
raphy 1916 : 134). In 13 th-century Madurai, South-
ern India, ascetics (kovaṇvar) were charged with 
the performances of Tiruvempāvai and temple 
women were given the responsibility of singing 
hymns indicating the involvement of ascetics along 
with women in performance-based worship.51 Sim-
ilarly, in 12 th–13 th-century Andhra Pradesh, Devi 
(1960 : 61) has noted the close proximity of the large 
settlements of temple women and Brahmin priests 
in certain towns, possibly indicating their interde-
51. See the transcriptions of inscriptions ARE  192 of 
1943–1944 and ARE  143, 144, 149 and 161 of 1940–1941 in 
Davis and Orr 2007: 80. pendence and involvement in temple worship.52 It 
is therefore not impossible that analogous activities 
were carried out in temple settings in the Khmer 
domains around the same time, and especially 
during the reign of Jayavarman VII between the 
12th and 13 th century.
The entrances of Jayavarman VII’s temples, 
such as Ta Prohm, Banteay Kdei, Bayon and Preah 
Khan of Angkor, house a ‘hall with dancers’ struc-
ture that has finely carved reliefs of several hundred 
female dancers. Just after crossing this structure at 
Preah Khan, we see several dancing Śivas or Śaiva 
52. These large settlements were found at Draksharama, 
Palakol, Srikakulam, Chebrolu and Velpur. For inscriptions 
on temple women and priests, see no. 989 ( South Indian 
Inscriptions, vol. 5: 375) and nos. 107, 110, 115 ( South Indian 
Inscriptions, vol. 10: 48, 50, 52).
Fig. 6.8 : Śaiva ascetic on the far right is seen in a company of woman/dancer, possibly in a hermitage setting (deer 
on the lower register is the indication) on the inner gallery-west wall (between BY29  and BY30 ) of the Bayon. 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   206 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 209] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor207
ascetics carved on the pillars (Fig. 6.9 ). The entire 
inner gallery of the Bayon temple is filled with the 
depictions of Śaiva ascetics, indicating their impor -
tance in the Buddhist court of Jayavarman VII (Fig. 
6.10). Khmer Buddhism, especially during Jayavar-
man VII’s time, did not at all exclude Śaivism, es-
pecially for certain royal or temple rituals.53 The 
53. See Stern 1927: 31–32. Inscription K. 288, v. 79 ( IC, 
IV: 216) of Prasat Chrung, Angkor Thom, compares Jaya -
varman VII to a Śaiva guru in his role of saviour of souls 
through initiation, and the benefit of his governance is 
said to be similar to the benefit bestowed on his disciples 
by a Śaiva guru: cf. Sanderson 2003–2004: 430, who argues 
that Jayavarman VII too was initiated into Śaivism in order 
to remove the stain ( mala ) that prevents the soul from 
experiencing the deployment of Śiva-ness. As Kamaleswar 
Bhattacharya (1997: 49) has observed: ‘The old Hindu cults 
continued under Jayavarman VII. In fact all the local cults, 
whether Hindu or Buddhist, were reunited in the Bayon… 
The king and his dignitaries erected numerous Hindu 
images at Preah Khan of Angkor and Banteay Chhmar… 
The old Hindu families retained their traditional privileges.’ 
He further adds that ‘Hearing that Cambodia was still full 
of excellent scholars of Vedas, a Brahman from Narapati -
deśa (Burma) went there to display his knowledge. King 
Jayavarman VII made him his Chaplain.’ See 13th-century 
inscription K. 567, v. 23 (Finot 1925: 393).Brahmins’ roles included worship of deities with 
dance and music. They would have been active 
in a large wooden ‘hall with dancers’ at the main 
entrance of the Bayon.54 Under him, the female 
dancing figures occur on an unprecedented scale, 
reproduced in thousands of times in the reliefs of 
the Bayon.55 
Davidson (2002 : 223) maintains that the Pāśu-
patas may be the origin for the diffusion of singing 
and dancing in Buddhism, especially in reference 
to esoteric Yoginītantras.56 Pāśupatas also seem to 
have exerted some influence on Mahāyāna Bud -
dhists, in whose ritual music played an important 
54. For a detailed discussion on this structure and its 
possible ritual function, see Chemburkar 2015.
55. Sharrock (2007: 260) calls this final phase of Jaya -
varman VII’s architectural decoration with 6,250 dancing 
female figures carved into the entrance pillars and gopura  
friezes of the Bayon ‘yoginification’.
56. Pāśup
atas were so influential for early Esoteric Bud -
dhist circles that Avalokiteśvara is depicted wearing the 
dress and attributes of Śiva Paśupati. Vajrayāna Siddhas 
were, for all the appearances, the first Buddhists to employ 
singing (not chanting) and dancing (not simple hand ges -
tures) in the acts of offering before images. Fig. 6.9 : (Left and centre) Dancers’ reliefs on the columns of ‘hall with dancers’ structure at Preah Khan of Ang-
kor; (right) depictions of dancing Śiva or ascetics on the columns of the structure PK 54  placed after the hall with 
dancers.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   207 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 210] ---
Swati Chemburkar208
role.57 It is not impossible that these originally Śaiva 
modes of worship were carried forward in Buddhist 
milieus of the ancient Khmer domains.
57. The Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra states that the worship 
is done with songs, instrumental music, dance, cymbals, 
and singing: see Schopen (2005: 38, 134) and Hara (1966: 
136–137), who has noted that some passages inspired by 
Pāśupata doctrines also appear in that Buddhist scripture. 
For a mention of different forms of music and dance em-
ployed in a Buddhist temple, see the 12th-century Gaya 
inscription (Indraji 1881).Dancers, singers, musicians, and other 
entertainers
In addition to the dancers who carried out rituals 
and recitations on a daily basis in the temples, 
many more performed during the festivals. 
Temple inscriptions in Old Khmer often mention 
the Sanskrit word utsava or festival along with 
the descriptions of various spectacles inside the 
temple complexes. Words such as pañcotsava (five 
religious festivals), mahotsava (the great festival), 
and mahānavamī (the Hindu festival of Dussehra) 
occur as royal celebrations throughout the Ang -
Fig. 6.10 : Sandstone fragment of the Bayon pediment depicting ascetics and dancers. 
National Museum of Cambodia, Phnom Penh, Accession no. 1692 .
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   208 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 211] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor209
korian period. A relief from the walls of the ‘Leper 
King Terrace’ in Angkor’s Royal Plaza depicts a 
sword swallower accompanied by a cymbalist and 
a drummer (Fig. 6.11 ).
During Jayavarman VII’s reign, the annual rice 
festival, according to Zhou Daguan’s account, was 
the greatest annual celebration of earth’s fecundi-
ty, where rice was burned as an offering to all the 
Buddhas in Angkor. The Preah Khan inscription mentions the commencement of the phālguna fes-
tival every year when 122  deities were displayed. 
These would be festival replicas brought in on 
palanquins from other temples in Angkor and re-
ceived at the entrance of the temple with much 
fanfare. We know that images of dancing Śiva were 
indeed carried in palanquins across Angkor. On 
the basis of the inscriptional record (e.g., K. 155 , 
IC V: 65 ), Pou (1997 : 246) has suggested that the 
dancers of a ballet group performed for effigies of 
Śiva during ceremonies held in the temple pre -
cincts. The early 11 th-century Old Khmer inscrip-
tion K. 276 from Prasat Ta Keo lists among the 
temple donations of a scholar named Yogīśvara ‘a 
palanquin in which is placed the ten-armed Lord 
Nāṭakeśvara with all his ornaments’.58 The Preah 
Khan inscription stele mentions how Śiva Bhad-
reśvara and Pṛthuśaileśvara were carried to Preah 
Khan every year for the Phālguṇa festival (Maxwell 
2008 : 72, 73). These records remind us of the grand 
festivities and processions held during the Cōḻa in 
Tamil Nadu, who were in contact with Angkor.59 
Aghoraśiva’s mid-12 th-century ritual guidebook 
Mahotsavavidhi, composed during the reign of Rā -
jarāja Cōḻa II, describes the temple festivals and the 
procedures to be followed.60
Of all the performers, the ones who play 
the most prominent role in the festival are the 
rudragaṇikās (Śiva’s female retinue/courtesans), 
the female temple dancers. In the procession, 
rudragaṇikās accompany the ācāryas (Davis 
2014: 159). The Ajitāgama (27.157) speaks of 
rudragaṇikās as lovely bodied women of Śiva’s 
abode who wear garlands and ornaments.61 The 
58. K. 276 (IC, IV: 154–155). The festival images were no 
doubt carried from their home temples in the provinces 
and elsewhere in Angkor on palanquins, as depicted on 
the walls of Banteay Chhmar.
59. For a discussion on parallels in the domain of temple 
architecture and performance-based worship between the 
Cōḻa court and Angkor from the 10th to the 13th century, 
see Chemburkar 2015.
60. The Mahotsavavidhi  is a Śai va ritual manual com -
posed by the ācārya  Aghoraśiva during the reign of Cōḻa 
King Rājarāja II in 1157 CE to guide a priest in the perfor -
mance of a nine-day temple festival. A translation may be found in Davis 2014.
61.
 Quoted i
n Davis 2014: 26.
Fig. 6.11 : A sword swallower along with a drummer 
and cymbal player. Leper king terrace, north wall. 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   209 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 212] ---
Swati Chemburkar210
Rauravāgama (ch. 19 ) adds that they should be 
pure, calm, beautiful, young and well trained in 
dance (ibid.). According to the Mahotsavavidhi, 
the rudragaṇikās perform throughout the festival 
and often carry out key ritual practices (ibid.: 26). 
The question to explore is whether we can regard 
the Khmer dancers as counterparts of the Indian 
gaṇikās/rudragaṇikās, and whether these dancers 
are regular members of the temple staff or profes-
sionals drawn from the surrounding community.62 
62. The Śivadharmottara  (1 2.168) refers to free women 
who ‘could be forced as punishment for unspecified of -
fences to become Rudragaṇikās (also called Rudrakanyās 
or Rudranārīs), female temple slaves of a superior class 
whose duty was to gratify the deity with dancing… They 
are superior to other persons who are the god’s property’ 
(Sanderson 2003–2004: 399, fn. 181). Goodall’s (2018) work 
on Rudragaṇikās discusses the 16th-century Āśaucadīpikā , Indian literature conventionally considers names 
ending in Senā, such as Vasantasenā (heroine of the 
classical Sanskrit play Mṛcchakaṭikā), Madanasenā 
and Mādhavasenā (in the 11 th-century Sanskrit 
play Ubhayābhisārikā of Vararuci) to be courte-
sans of high social status.63 Similar names occur 
a text on ritual impurity based on a collation of four rather 
corrupt sources. V. 9c states: ṛṣibhāryā varārohā mama 
saṃparkataḥ punaḥ, tais tyaktā mama gehe tu tāḥ smṛtā 
rudrakanyakāḥ , ‘Rudrakanyās are held to be fine-hipped 
wives of the sages whom those [sages] abandoned in my 
temple, because of their contact with me’ (quoted from 
Goodall 2018: 117). 
63. The Ubhay
ābhisārikā  contains multiple mentions of 
courtesans, such as Nārāyaṇadattā, Devadattā and Anaṅga -
dattā (Venkatacharya and Warder 1967). Nāṭyaśāstra  (ch. 
XIX, v. 33) explains that courtesans’ names should end in 
-dattā, -mitrā and -senā (for a translation of the passage, 
see Ghosh 1950: 345; cf. Chandra 1973: 97). Goodall (2018: 
Fig. 6.12 : Historic procession on the south gallery wall of Angkor Wat depicting dancers, flutist, singers and 
drummers leading the procession (top two images); Śaiva priests are depicted (lower two images) holding a book 
or a bell, and some are seated with crossed arms. 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   210 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 213] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor211
in Khmer epigraphy such as Priyasenā (a dancer), 
Samarasenā (dancer), Madhurasenā (musician who 
plays an instrument).64 
The Mahotsavavidhi account of the festival, 
describing rudragaṇikās, matches well a relief of 
Angkor Wat (Fig. 6.12 ):
In front of the god are dancers and flutists, 
singers and drummers. On both sides are the 
Rudragaṇikās and others engaged in dance. In 
front come the Mahāśaivas, and behind come 
brahmins intoning the sounds of the Veda 
and other sacred hymns. After them come 
Maheśvaras belonging to all four Classes … 
Pleasing god this way, on the first day in the 
morning, Śiva rides on a cart.... (trans. Davis 
2014 : 89)
In the Bayon reliefs, dancers and musicians 
perform on nāga balustrade terraces, in float -
ing pavilions, or pillared halls. Pou’s study of 
dance and music-related inscriptions categorizes 
proper names based on the specific performances, 
achievements, technical competence, and phys -
ical qualities: see e.g., Tīttaru (one who dances 
like partridge), Vṛttavalī (one who moves in row, 
in circle), Raṅgaśrī (pearl of theatre), Carumatī 
(pretty as parrot), Payodharī (having beautiful 
breasts) or Suvibhrama (displaying beautiful 
coquetry). It’s an illuminating account of the 
sociological connotations of these dancers and 
musicians (Fig. 6.13 ). 
The Sanskrit Śaivāgamas talk about the qualifi-
cations expected by these performers as well as their 
ritual ‘masters’. Uttarakāmikāgama specifies the 
masters of music should be knowledgeable about 
musical instruments, compositions, songs, and 
recitations as well as nine moods of drama (Davis 
and Orr 2007: 81, fn. 6). 10th-century Old Khmer 
inscription K. 181 mentions an elite man upā-
dhyāya Thṃon, or a master of percussion music.65 
Pou (1997: 236) observes a harp-like instrument 
being played by court ladies, celestial beings and  
102–103) discusses the names ending in -senā as typical 
courtesan names found in Indian literature. 
64. K. 600E ( IC, II: 22 ); cf. Zakharov 2019. See Saveros 
Pou (1997: 244) for the names of singers and dancers in 
Khmer epigraphy.
65.  K. 181A
, v. 8 ( IC, VI: 140); cf. Pou 1997: 243. learned men or paṇḍita, who were apparently ac-
companying reciters and singers (Fig. 6.14). 
Vīṇa appears in many Khmer inscriptions as 
an offering, an instrument, and also as a proper 
name Kaṃsteṅ or Sir Vīṇa.66 Another term guru 
laṃpeṅ or master performer that appears in the 
Khmer epigraphy has a strong ritual connotation, 
as argued by Pou.67 After the 10th century, we come 
across Vāditrapura or the ‘town of music’ in the 
Khmer epigraphy.68 What exactly did the town 
contribute? 
Music and dance had acquired an institutional 
status in Angkor as we see from the term Varṇa 
rmāṃ or corporation of dancers. One such cor-
poration belonged to a lady Tāñ Pañ, who as the 
text adds, was in charge of the concubines (khloñ 
snaṃ) of the wealthy high-ranking author of the 
inscription.69 The head of these corporations are all 
attested with honorific titles such as Vāp or Sir, for 
e.g., Vāp Ānanda, Vāp Rājadāsa, and held high po-
sitions in the court.70 Inscriptional records mention 
a king or an official offering rpam or ballet group 
to the gods. These records mention dancers, mu -
sicians and instrument players by Sanskrit names 
with complimentary meanings rather than the  
derogatory Khmer names.71 K. 831  mentions 
dancers and other temple personnel who were  
in active service for half a month at a time, with 
music performed at least three times daily or even, 
as we shall see, ‘without cease’.72 
66. K. 205, v. 14; IC , III: 5 .
67. K. 254B, vv. 19, 23 ( IC, III: 1 85). It mentions guru laṃpeṅ , 
which Cœdès translates as unpaid or voluntary guru, but 
Pou (1997: 234) argues for him being a game performer 
with a ritual connotation.
68.  K. 554, v
. 5 (IC, II: 14); K. 532B, v. 16 (Finot 1925: 354).
69.  The Khmer word pedā  (der iving from Skt. peṭaka ) 
occurs in the inscription K. 155 ( IC, V: 64), which Pou (1997: 
246) translates as ‘company’ or ‘troop’, and thus pedānātaka  
or pedānatta would be a ‘group or company of dancers’.
70. K. 831, v
v. 6–8 ( IC, V: 147); Pou 1997: 240.
71. For the names such as Vasantamālikā, Tanvaṅgī, 
Gandharvagītā or Sakhīpriyā, see inscriptions K. 137, v. 55 
(IC, II: 115–118); K. 557, vv. 33–34 (IC, VIII: 166) and K. 155 
(IC, V: 64). See Pou (1997: 244); cf. Jacob (1993: 129–130). 
Vickery (1998: 231) argues that ‘the examples are too few to 
decide the status of the musicians and dancers and ques-
tions whether it differs from one place to another.’ 
72. K. 831 ( IC, V: 1
47).
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   211 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 214] ---
Swati Chemburkar212
Fig. 6.13: Bayon reliefs depicting dance and music in different settings: (top) inner gallery, east wall between 
BY22 and BY37; (middle) inner gallery, south wall between BY27  and BY28 ; (bottom) inner gallery-east between 
wall BY36 and BY37.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   212 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 215] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor213
Fig. 6.14 : (Top) An ascetic is seen playing a harp like instrument and accompanying a dance at the Bayon temple, 
inner gallery, north wall between BY33  and BY34 ; (bottom) a sage is reciting from the Rāmāyaṇa with Śiva in the 
centre and Hanumān, Sītā, and Rāma with a bow. Banteay Chhmar, pediment in the ‘hall with dancers’ (BC 54 ). 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   213 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 216] ---
Swati Chemburkar214
The Ta Prohm inscription details how Jayavar-
man VII organized the performances by dancers 
attached to the temple, possibly referring to drama-
tized Buddhist stories.73 Epigraphy mentions words 
such as vāca, kinnara, and gandharva, indicating 
reciters performing divine services, a class of per-
forming artists and singers in the temples.74 These 
records refer to singers by proper names such as 
Sugītā (one who sings beautifully), Haṅsavādī (one 
with a goose voice), Kaṇṭhagītā (one with a gut -
tural voice) and Gāndhārasvanā (producing the 
third primary note-gāndhāra of music). Based on 
her analysis of relevant Khmer inscriptions, Pou 
argues for the gandharvas of ancient Cambodia 
as being human rather than semi-divine figures.75 
These are well known in Indian culture as celes -
tial musicians playing string instruments. Gān- 
dharvavidyā or science of music was known to the 
Khmers, as can be evinced from the Banteay Srei 
inscription.76 Along with gandharva and kinnara, 
Pou has analysed the Khmer expression caṃryaṅ 
Śikharā and argued that caṃryāṅ were entertainers 
of the small temple-community, of the bard type.77
The most popular character in the Khmer 
Rāmakerti version of the Rāmāyaṇa theatre is a 
73. The king paired the Buddhist practice of dāna  (char ity) 
and śīla (proper conduct) with the performances of dancers. 
See K. 273, v. 87 (Cœdès 1906: 77–78).
74. Based on the inscription K. 356 (Cœdès 1911a: 400–
404), Pou (1997: 242) translates the word vāca as a reciter 
performing a divine service. For Kinnara, see K. 327A, v. 
29; K. 327B; K. 331B (Bergaigne 1893: 319) and Bhattacharya 
2009: 79, 81. For gandharva, see K. 842, sv. 20 (IC, I: 147); 
K. 129 (IC, II: 83); K. 155 (IC, V: 64). 
75. Inscription No. 264 at the Darasuram temple men -
tions a musician Perundanattu-Gandharva; see http://www.
whatisindia.com/inscriptions/south_indian_inscriptions/
darasuram/introduction.html. Another inscription (no. 
306) from the same place gives us an idea of the patronage 
accorded to the performing arts by royalty. It refers to the 
appointment of an abhinaya-nattuvanar  in addition to 
others in the temple for performing what was called the 
ahamarggam , an expression style of dance as distinct from 
action nṛtya .
76. K. 842A
, v. 20 ( IC, I: 147). See note 30 above for the 
remark that Pāśupatas were prescribed to perform singing 
according to (or against) the rules of the Gāndharvaśāstra .
77. In this case it would be a group of people playing 
Śikharā or string instrument (Pou 1997: 242). Another 
example is caṃryyāṅ stuti , or a group of singers.buffoon, which traces its origins to the Sanskrit 
word bhaṇḍa (buffoon or vidūṣaka). Groslier 
(1921: 100, 125, 128) has detected the presence of 
such figures in parades and processions depicted 
in the bas-reliefs of Khmer temples, but they also 
played a role in the ritual offerings for the daily 
worship78 (Fig. 6.15 ). 
78. At Preah Vihear for Śikhareśvara and at Phnom 
Sandak for Śivapura Danden, priest Divākara had offered 
jesters along with the dancers and musicians for the daily 
worship: see Cœdès and Dupont 1943: 148–149. In spite of 
pointing out the presence of such figures, Groslier never 
Fig. 6.15 : Possible depiction of a buffoon in the victory 
parade at the Bayon (inner gallery, north wall, be-
tween BY32  and BY33 ). 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   214 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 217] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor215
This character may hark back to the buffoon of 
the classical Indian theatre, who was a Brahman yet 
at the same time was ugly and ridiculous. It may 
be relevant to mention here that critical references 
to Pāśupatas and, especially, Kāpālikas found in 
mainstream literary texts often portray them as 
buffoons and performers holding drums and trum -
pets (Lorenzen 2000 : 83). As noted by Acri (2014 : 
41, fn. 89 ), a figure mixing the characteristics of the 
vidūṣaka with those of Śaiva tantric antinomian 
practitioners may be the buyut mentioned in the 
Middle Javanese chronicle Pararaton, carrying the 
honorific title hyaṅ, acting as a buffoon, master or 
partner of dancing girls, as well as a magician. A 
connection between buffoonery and supernatural/
magical power is also found in the character em-
bodying a comedian and black magician known 
as bondres in sacred Balinese temple-dance and 
performance (ibid.). 
It is still difficult to determine whether these 
dancers, musicians, singers, and entertainers were 
members of the working population with special 
skills, or belonged to the elite class of ascetics or as 
a part of a laity that belonged to a particular sect. 
Nevertheless, they held an important position in 
the royal and sacred sphere. 
temple dancers in 13th-century 
cambodia
That temple worship activities in which female 
dancers played a role were thriving in the 13 th 
century in both South and Southeast Asia—for 
instance, at Angkor after the reign of Jayavarman 
VII—is suggested by two contemporary historical 
accounts. One is the Description of the World by 
famous Venetian traveller Marco Polo (1256 –1323 ), 
who visited Malabar in Southern India at the end of 
the 13th century. Polo makes interesting observa-
tions about the temples, priests, and dancers:
And again I tell you that they have many idols 
in their monasteries [temple] men and women, 
identifies any particular figure in the bas-reliefs. My hy -
pothesis regarding Fig. 6.15 is based on the depiction of the 
same figure on the west wall (BY29 and BY28) of the inner 
gallery, where people are making offerings to him.to serve which idols many girls are offered in 
this way. For their mother and their father offer them to the idols … And when they have of -
fered them, every time that the [Kālamukha?] monks of the monastery [temple] of the idol 
require those girls who have been offered to 
the idol to come to the monastery [temple] to 
make amusement for the idol, they come their 
immediately and sing and sound music and 
dance and make great festival…. and there 
are great numbers of these girls, for they make 
great company.
79
During his Malabar visit, Marco Polo had spent 
some time at the port of Muṭṭupallī80 in Andhra, 
where Kākatiyas were ruling. Among the several 
schools of Śaivism, it was the Kālamukha, an off-
shoot of the Pāśupatas, that gained prominence 
during their reign.81 It appears that dance- and 
music-based temple rituals were performed by 
this current of Śaivism. It is likely that the account 
here is alluding to the institution of rudragaṇikā/
devadāsī in Śaiva temples.
The other source of interest is the 1225  CE 
Chinese chronicle Zhufanzhi, by Zhao Rugua, the 
superintendent of maritime trade in Canton. Even 
though the chronicle is based on hearsay from 
traders and merchants rather than on visits to the 
countries engaged in maritime trade, it remains 
an important source of information on geography 
and ethnography of mediaeval mainland Southeast 
Asia. It narrates how twenty thousand dancing girls 
sang songs twice daily in honour of Buddha at four 
79. Marco Polo, trans. Moule and Pelliot 1938: 393 (addi -
tion
s between brackets are my own). 
80. Ibid.: 397. Nilakantha Sastri (1939: 174–175) argues that 
Mutifili mentioned by Marco Polo is the famous port of 
Muṭṭupallī indeed.
81. See Hanmkomḍa epigraph (Venkataramanayya 1974, 
nos. 15 and 35), mentioning a Rāmeśvara Paṇḍita who was 
proficient in the  lakuleśvarāgamamahāsiddhānta ; Saṅiga -
ram inscription (Parabrahma Sastry 1974, nos. 19, 22, 24), 
mentioning Rudradeva as Parama-Maheśvara; Ablur 
inscription (Fleet 1898–1899: 220), mentioning the Kāla -
mukha ācārya  Someśvara Paṇḍita as being proficient in 
the lākulasiddhānta ; Mallakapuram inscription (Pantulu 
1930: 160), describing the activities of the Goḷaki maṭha  in 
which Pāśupatas resided, which gained popularity among 
the masses while Kālamukhas lost their hold at the court; 
cf. Yazdani 1960: 700–708.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   215 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 218] ---
Swati Chemburkar216
thousand Buddhist establishments in Gujarat, and 
how Cōḻa kings retained ‘10,000  dancing girls’ in 
their temples during the 12th–13 th century. Speak-
ing of Angkor, Zhao refers to the devout Buddhists 
and 300 Khmer women called a-nan [Skt. Ānanda, 
bliss] offering dance and food to the Buddha in 
Chen-la [i.e. Cambodia] (Hirth and Rockhill 1911 : 
95, 100, 153). Were these dancing women from Vāp 
Ānanda’s troupe some local counterparts of the 
Indic gaṇikās? 
conclusion
On the basis of textual, literary, and inscriptional 
evidence from South and Southeast Asia, I have 
highlighted the importance of dance and music 
making in Śaiva devotional and ritual settings in the 
ancient Khmer domains. I have argued that ascet-
ics belonging to the Pāśupata tradition of Śaivism 
and its further subgroups may have been involved 
in the performance-based ritual and worship in 
Angkor from the 7 th century onwards, and that 
these modes of worship were further developed 
during the Angkorian period in Śaiva Mantramār -
gic milieus in a way akin to roughly contemporary 
South Indian realities. The involvement of Śaiva 
ascetics and/or priests in temple worship may have 
been strictly connected to the political sphere—
for instance, royal coronations. While the textual 
evidence from the Sanskrit Śaiva corpus studied 
thus far by philologists is often characterized by 
an esoteric and prescriptive nature, which only 
gives us a partial view,82 a wider-ranging explo-
ration of other sources of data suggest that the 
community on the ground was more diverse than 
we imagine.83 For instance, Bisschop (2010 : 485) 
argues that not all Pāśupata adepts abided by the 
82. Though Kauṇḍinya’s Pāśupatasūtra  outl ines and 
emphasizes a lifelong asceticism, manuals discovered by 
Diwakar Acharya (such as the Saṃskāravidhi : see Acharya 
2007) demonstrate a more diverse religious landscape, in -
volving both ascetics and the lay community. 
83. A compr
ehensive study of the corpus of early Śaiva 
texts catering to the lay community of Śaiva devotees, in -
cluding the Śivadharmottara  and the Śivadharmaśāstra , 
will no doubt yield precious data to reconstruct the actual 
practices of the community of religious specialists and lay 
people.strict ascetic practice prescribed in the texts, for 
there were some who served the needs of a larger 
Śaiva community, such as priests or ācāryas. The 
presence in Khmer art and epigraphy of these re-
ligious specialists, as well as of a community of lay 
devotees, is evident. The depictions of liṅga ven-
eration on the temple walls and the involvement 
of ‘Brahmanical’ religious types in performance 
scenes, and again their association with female 
dancers, show varied groups of agents involved in 
Śaiva ritual practice—even in a Buddhist setting, 
such as the one of Jayavarman VII. 
While it is impossible to draw a clear time -
line—for the line has twists, spirals, and vanish -
ing points—, my chapter has made a preliminary 
effort to understand the specific Śaiva tradition of 
temple-centred, performance-based worship by 
the practitioners hailing originally from the Indian 
subcontinent, and has argued for its continuing 
existence in Angkor for more than 600  years. More 
importantly, given the presence of significant visual 
and epigraphic evidence, it has highlighted the cre -
ative role of Southeast Asia in the historical devel-
opment of Śaivism—for it is precisely in this region 
that new forms of political patronage, temple ritual, 
and service to the lay community might have arisen 
and spread further across the Indic world.
References
Acharya, Diwakar. 2006. ‘The Role of Caṇḍa in 
the Early History of the Pāśupata Cult and the 
Image on the Mathurā Pillar dated Gupta Year 
61’, Indo-Iranian Journal 48/3–4: 207–222.
. 2007. ‘The Saṃskāravidhi: A Manual on 
the Transformatory Rite of the Lakulīśa Pāśu-
patas’, in Dominic Goodall and André Padoux 
(eds.), Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hé-
lène Brunner, pp. 27–48. Pondicherry: Institut 
français de Pondich éry/École française d’Ex-
trême-Orient.
. 2018. ‘Pāśupatas’, in Knut A. Jacobsen, 
Helene Basu, Angelika Malinar, and Vasudha 
Narayanan (eds.), Brill’s Encyclopaedia  
of Hinduism. [Online publication: http:  
//dx.doi.org/10.1163/2212-5019_beh_COM_  
9000000056]
Acri, Andrea. 2014. ‘Birds, Bards, Buffoons and 
Brahmans: (Re-)Tracing the Indic Roots of 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   216 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 219] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor217
Some Ancient and Modern Performing Char-
acters from Java and Bali’, Archipel 88: 13–70.
. 2018. ‘Performance as Religious Observance 
in Some Śaiva Ascetic Traditions from South 
and Southeast Asia’, Cracow Indological Studies  
20/1: 1–30.
Annual Report on Indian Epigraphy. 1916. Madras: 
Government of Madras, Public Department.
Bakker, Hans. 2000. ‘Somaśarman, Somavaṃśa 
and Somasiddhānta: A Pāśupata tradition in 
seventh-century Dakṣiṇa Kosala: Studies in 
the Skandapurāṇa III’, in Ryutaro Tsuchida 
and Albrecht Wezler (eds.), Harānandalaharī: 
Volume in Honour of Professor Minoru Hara 
on his Seventieth Birthday, pp. 1–20. Reinbek: 
Dr. Inge Wezler Verlag für Orientalistische 
Fachpublikationen.
. 2014. The World of the Skandapurāṇa: 
Northern India in the Sixth and Seventh Centu-
ries. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Banerjea, Jitendra Nath. 1941. The Development 
of Hindu Iconography. Calcutta: University of 
Calcutta.
. 1951. ‘Lakulīśa—The Founder or the Sys -
tematiser of the Pāśupata Order’, in The Pro -
ceedings of the Indian History Congress 14: 32–36. 
Jaipur.
Barnett, Lionel D. 1915–1916. ‘Bankapur Inscription 
of the time of Someśvara I and the Kaḍamba 
Harikeśarin: A.D. 1055’, in Sten Konow and 
F.W. Thomas (eds.), Epigraphia Indica, vol. 13, 
pp. 168–197. Calcutta/Bombay: Superintendent 
Government Printing/British India Press.
. 1925. ‘Inscription of Sudi F., of the Reign 
of Someśvara I: Śaka 981’, in F.W. Thomas (ed.), 
Epigraphia Indica, vol. 15, pp. 85–93. Calcutta/
Bombay: Government of India Central Publi -
cation Branch/British India Press.
Barth, Auguste. 1885. Inscriptions sanscrites du 
Cambodge (extraits des notices et extraits des 
manuscrits de la Biblioth èque nationale 27, 1re 
partie, 1er fascicule),  pp. 1–181. Paris: Imprimerie 
Nationale.
Becker, Judith. 2004. Gamelan Stories: Tantrism, 
Islam, and Aesthetics in Central Java. 2nd ed. 
Arizona State University: Program for Southeast 
Asian Studies.Bergaigne, Abel. 1893. Inscriptions sanscrites de 
Campā et du Cambodge (extraits des notices et 
extraits des manuscrits de la Bibliothèque na -
tionale 27, 2e partie, 2e fascicule), pp. 181–632. 
Paris: Imprimerie Nationale.
Bhandarkar, D.R. 1908. ‘An Êkliṅgjî Stone Inscrip -
tion and the Origin and History of the Lakulîśa 
Sect’, Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society 22: 151–165.
Bhandarkar, R.G. 1913. Vaiṣṇavism, Śaivism and 
Minor Religious Systems. Grundriss der Indo- 
arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde Bd. 3, 
Hft. 6. Strassburg: Tr übner.
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar. 1955. ‘La secte des Pā çu-
pata dans l’ancien Cambodge’, Journal Asiatique  
243/4: 480–487.
. 1997. ‘The Religions of Ancient Cambodia’, 
in Helen Jessup and Thierry Zéphir (eds.), Sculp -
ture of Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millen-
nium Glory, pp. 34–53. Washington/Paris: 
Thames and Hudson.
. 2009. A Selection of Sanskrit Inscriptions 
from Cambodia. Phnom Penh: Centre for 
Khmer Studies.
Bisschop, Peter. 2006. Early Śaivism and the 
Skandapurāṇa: Sects and Centres. Gronin-
gen Oriental Studies XXI. Groningen: Egbert 
Forsten.
. 2010. ‘Śaivism in the Gupta-Vākāṭaka Age’, 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 20/4: 477–
488. 
Bloomfield, Maurice. 1924. ‘On False Ascetics and 
Nuns in Hindu Fiction’, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 44: 202–242.
Chakraborti, Haripada. 1970. ‘Appendix I: On 
Liṅga Worship and the Pāśupatas’, in Pāśupata 
Sūtram with Pañchārtha-Bhāṣya of Kauṇḍnya, 
pp. 194–203. Calcutta: Academic Publishers.
Chandra, Moti. 1973. The World of Courtesans. 
Delhi: Vikas Publications.
Chemburkar, Swati. 2015. ‘Dancing Architec -
ture: “Hall with Dancers” in Jayavarman VII’s 
Temples’, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 
46/3: 514–536.
Chemburkar, Swati and Shivani Kapoor. 2018. 
‘Pāśupata Sect in Ancient Cambodia and 
Champa: Art Historical Evidence’, in Võ Văn 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   217 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 220] ---
Swati Chemburkar218
Thắng and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Masterpiec -
es of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture, 
pp. 45–57. Bangkok: River Books.
Chhom, Kunthea. 2016. Le rôle du Sanskrit dans le 
développement de la langue khmère: Une étude 
épigraphique du VI au XIV siècle. PhD disser-
tation, École Pratique des Hautes Études.
Cœdès, George. 1906. ‘La stèle de Ta Prohm’, Bul-
letin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 6/1: 
44–86.
. 1911a. ‘ Études cambodgiennes V. Une 
inscription d’Udayādityavarman I’, Bulletin  
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 11/3: 400–
404.
. 1911b. ‘Les bas-reliefs d’Angkor-Vat’, Bul-
letin de la Commission arch éologique de l’Indo-
chine
. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale. 
. 1913. ‘Ètudes cambodgiennes VII–XI’, Bul-
letin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 13/6: 
1–36.
. 1932. ‘ Études cambodgiennes XXX. À  
la recherché du Ya çodharā çrama’, Bulletin  
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 32/1: 
84–112.
. [IC] 1937–1966. Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
éditées et traduites, vols. I–VIII. Hanoi and 
Paris: École fran çaise d’Extr ême-Orient.
. 1954. ‘La stèle du Tûol Room Tim. Essai 
d’interprétation par la langue bahnar d’un texte 
juridique khmer du Xe siècle’, Journal Asiatique  
242/1: 49–67.
Cœdès, George and Pierre Dupont. 1943. ‘Les Stèles 
de Sdôk Kâk Thom, Phnom Sandak et Práah 
Vihār’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 43: 56–134.
Dalal, Chimanlal D. 1966. Gaṇakārikā of Ācārya 
Bhāsarvajña with the Ratnaṭikā and four ap -
pendices including the Kāravaṇa-Māhātmya. 
Baroda: Oriental Institute. 
Davidson, Ronald. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: 
A Social History of the Tantric Movement. New 
York: Columbia University Press. 
Davis, Richard. 2014. A Priest’s Guide for the Great 
Festival: Aghorasiva’s Mahotsavavidhi (South 
Asia Research). New York: Oxford University 
Press. Davis, Richard and Leslie Orr. 2007. ‘People of 
the Festival’, in Dominic Goodall and André 
Padoux (eds.), Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire 
d’Hélène Brunner, pp. 73–97. Pondicherry: In-
stitut fran çais de Pondichéry.
Devi, Yasoda V. 1960. ‘The History of Andhra 
Country, Subsidiary Dynasties (A.D. 1000-
1500)’, Journal of the Andhra Historical Research 
Society 26: 1–102.
Estève, Julia. 2009. Étude critique des phénomènes 
de syncrétisme religieux dans le Cambodge 
angkorien.  PhD dissertation, École Pratique 
des Hautes Études.
Filliozat, Vasundhara. 2015. Śaiva Monuments at 
Paṭṭadakkal. New Delhi: ASI, e-publication.
Finot, Louis. 1904. ‘Notes d’épigraphie: 11. Les ins-
cription de Mī-sõn’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 4/1: 897–977.
. 1912. ‘Notes d’épigraphie: 13. L’inscription 
de Ban That’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 12/1: 1–28.
. 1915. ‘Notes d’épigraphie: 16. L’inscription 
de Sdok Kak Thom’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 15/2: 53–106.
. 1925. ‘Inscriptions d’Angkor’, Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 25/3–4: 
297–407.
. 1928. ‘Nouvelle Inscriptions de Sambor’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
28/1: 43–46.
Fleet, F.J. 1898–1899. ‘No 25, Inscriptions at Ablur’, 
Epigraphia Indica, vol. 5, pp. 213–264. Calcutta: 
Government of India Central Printing Office.
Ghosh, Manomohan. 1950. The Nāṭyaśāstra: A 
Treatise on Ancient Indian Dramaturgy and 
Histrionics, Ascribed to Bharata Muni . Calcutta: 
Asiatic Society.
Goodall, Dominic. 2015. ‘On K. 1049, a Tenth-Cen -
tury Cave Inscription from Battambang and on 
the Sectarian Obedience of the Śaiva Ascetics 
of Non-Royal Cave Inscriptions of Cambodia’, 
UDAYA: Journal of Khmer Studies 13: 3–34.
. 2018. ‘Rudragaṇikās: Courtesans in Śiva’s 
Temple? Some Hitherto Neglected Sanskrit 
Sources’, Cracow Indological Studies 20/1:  
91–143. 
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   218 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 221] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor219
Goodall, Dominic and Csaba Dezső. 2012. Dā-
modaraguptaviracitaṃ Kuṭṭanīmatam. The 
Bawd’s Counsel, being an Eighth-Century Verse 
Novel in Sanskrit, by Dāmodaragupta. Gronin-
gen: Egbert Forsten.
Goodall, Dominic and Karl-Heinz Golzio. 2011. 
‘Book Review of Kamaleswar Bhattacharya 
(ed.), A Selection of Sanskrit Inscriptions from 
Cambodia’, Indo-Iranian Journal 54: 49–60.
Groslier, George. 1921. Recherches sur les Cambod-
giens d’après les textes et les monuments depuis 
les premiers siècles de notre ère; ouvrage illustré 
de 200 photographies et de 1153 dessins et plans 
inédits de l’auteur (voyages et missions du Cam -
bodge de 1909 à 1904 et de 1917à 1920). Paris: 
A. Challamel.
Guy, John. 2014. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu Buddhist 
Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia. New York: 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Haendel, Alexandra. 2005. ‘The Divine in the 
Human World: Sculpture at Two Tenth-Cen-
tury Temples at Angkor’, Artibus Asiae 65/2: 
213–252.
Hara, Minoru. 1966. Materials for the Study of 
Pāśupata Philosophy. PhD dissertation, Harvard 
University.
Harris, Peter (ed. and trans.). 2007. A Record of 
Cambodia: The Land and its People, by Zhou 
Daguan. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
Hirth, Friedrich and W.W. Rockhill (trans.). 1911. 
Chau Ju-Kua, His Work on the Chinese and Arab 
Trade in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries, 
Entitled Chu-Fan-Chï. St. Petersburg: Imperial 
Academy of Sciences.
Huber, Edouard. 1911. ‘ Études Indochinoises’, Bul-
letin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 11/1: 
1–22.
IC
, see Cœd ès, George.
Indraji, Bhagvanlal. 1881. ‘An Inscription of Gaya 
dated in the Year 1813 of Buddha’s Nirvana, 
with Two Others of the Same Period’, Indian 
Antiquary 10: 341–347.
Jacob, Judith. 1993. ‘Pre-Angkor Cambodia: Ev -
idence from the Inscriptions in Khmer Con -
cerning the Common People and their Envi -
ronment’, in D.A. Smyth (ed.), Cambodian Linguistics, Literature and History, pp. 299–318. 
London: School of Oriental and African Studies, 
University of London.
Jash, Pranabananda. 1974. History of Śaivism. Cal-
cutta: Roy and Chaudhuri. 
Kafle, Nirajan. 2013. ‘The Li ṅgodbhava Myth in 
Early Śaiva Sources’, in Nina Mirnig, Péter-
Dániel Szántó and Michael Williams (eds.), 
Puṣpikā: Tracing Ancient India Through Texts 
and Traditions. Contributions to Current 
Research in Indology. Vol. 1. Proceedings of 
the International Indology Graduate Research 
Symposium, pp. 241–262. Oxford: Oxbow. 
. 2020. Niśvāsamukhatattvasaṃhitā: A 
Preface to the Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra 
(on Non-Tantric Śaivism at the Dawn of the 
Mantramārga); Critical Edition, with Introduc-
tion & Annotated Translation and an Appendix 
Containing Śivadharmasaṅgraha 5–9. Pondi-
cherry: Institut fran çais de Pondichéry/ École 
française d’Extr ême-Orient/Asien-Afrika Ins-
titut, Universität Hamburg.
Kapoor, Shivani. 2019. ‘Iconography of Pashupa -
ta Ascetics in Cambodia’, Orientations 50/1: 
122–131.
Lorenzen, David. 1991. The Kāpālikas and 
Kālāmukhas: Two Lost Śaivite Sects. 2nd ed. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. [1st ed. 1972]
. 2000. ‘A Parody of the Kāpālikas in the 
Mattavilāsa’, in David Gordon White (ed.), 
Tantra in Practice , pp. 81–97. Princeton/Oxford: 
Princeton University Press.
Majumdar, R.C. 1927. Ancient Indian Colonies in the 
Far East (Vol. I–Champa). Lahore: The Punjab 
Sanskrit Book Depot. 
Maxwell, Thomas. 2008. ‘The Stele Inscription of 
Preah Khan, Angkor, Text with Translation 
and Commentary’, UDAYA: Journal of Khmer 
Studies 8: 1–85.
Moule, A.C. and Paul Pelliot (trans. and annotated). 
1938. The Description of the World by Marco Polo, 
Vol. 1. London: Routledge.
Paṇḍit Durgāprasād and Kāśīnāth Pāṇḍurang Parab. 
1925. Samayamātṛkā of Kṣemendra (Sanskrit 
verses in Devanagari script). Bombay: Nirnaya 
Sagar Press.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   219 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 222] ---
Swati Chemburkar220
Pantulu, Ramavya J. 1930. ‘Malkapuram Stone-Pillar 
Inscription of Rudradeva (Rudramba)’, Journal 
of the Andhra Historical Research Society 4/1–2: 
148–162. 
Parabrahma Sastry, P.V. 1974. Inscriptions of 
Andhra Pradesh, Karimnagar District. Hyder-
abad: Government of Andhra Pradesh.
Pathak, V.S. 1960. History of Śaiva Cults in Northern 
India from Inscriptions (700 A.D. to 1200 A.D.). 
Varanasi: Ram Naresh Sharma.
Pou, Saveros. 1997. ‘Music and Dance in Ancient 
Cambodia as Evidenced by Old Khmer Epigra-
phy’, East and West 47/1–4: 229–248.
Ramesh, K.V. and S.P. Tewari. 1990. A Copper-Plate 
Hoard of the Gupta Period from Bagh, Madhya 
Pradesh. New Delhi: Archaeological Survey of 
India.
Rice, Benjamin L. 1902. Epigraphia Carnatica, Vol. 
7: Inscriptions in the Shimoga District (Part I). 
Mysore: Archaeological Survey of India.
Roveda, Vittorio. 2005. Images of the Gods: Khmer 
Mythology in Cambodia, Laos and Thailand. 
Bangkok: River Books. 
Samuel, Geoffrey. 2006. ‘The Siddha as a Cul -
tural Category’, in Robert N. Linrothe (ed.), 
Holy Madness: Portraits of Tantric Siddhas,  
pp. 22–33. New York/Chicago: Rubin Museum 
of Art/Serindia. 
Sanderson, Alexis G.J.S. 1988. ‘ Śaivism and the 
Tantric Traditions’, in Stewar
t Sutherland, 
Leslie Houlden, Peter Clarke and Friedhelm 
Hardy (eds.), The World’s Religions, pp. 660–
704. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
. 2003–2004. ‘The Śaiva Religion Among the 
Khmers, Part I’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 90–91: 352–464. 
. 2012–2013. ‘The Śaiva Literature’, Journal 
of Indological Studies 24–25: 1–113.
Sastri, Nilakantha K.A. 1939. Foreign Notices of 
South India: From Megasthenes to Ma Huan. 
Madras: University of Madras.
Sastri, R. Anantakrishna. 1940. Pasupata Sutras with 
Pancarthabhashya of Kaundinya. Trivandrum: 
The Oriental Manuscript Library of the Univer -
sity of Travancore.Schopen, Gregory. 2005. Figments and Fragments 
of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Sharrock, Peter D. 2007. ‘The Mystery of the Bayon 
Face Towers’, in Joyce Clark (ed.), Bayon: New 
Perspectives, pp. 230–282. Bangkok: River Books.
Shastri, Ajay Mitra. 1995. Inscriptions of the 
Śarabhapurīyas, Pāṇḍuvaṃśins and So -
mavaṃśins. 2 vols. Delhi. 
South Indian Inscriptions (Texts), Vol. 5. 1925. Mis-
cellaneous Inscriptions from the Tamil, Malay-
alam, Telugu and Kannada Countries, edited by 
Rao B.H. Krishna Sastri. Madras: The Superin-
tendent Government Press.
South Indian Inscriptions (Texts), Vol. 10. 1948. 
Telugu Inscriptions from the Madras Presiden-
cy, edited by J. Ramayya Pantulu. Delhi: The 
Manager of Publications.
Stern, Philippe. 1927. Le Bayon d’Angkor et l’évo -
lution de l’art khmer: étude et discussion de 
la chronologie des monuments khmers. Paris: 
Geuthner.
Stutterheim, Willem F. 1956 . ‘A Thousand Years 
Old Profession in the Princely Courts on Java’, 
in id., Studies in Indonesian Archaeology, pp. 
91–103. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Tawney, C.H. 1901. The Prabandhachintāmaṇi or 
Wishing-Stone of Narratives. Translated from 
the Original Sanskrit. Calcutta: The Asiatic 
Society.
Törzsök, Judith. 2016. ‘Theatre, Acting and the 
Image of the Actor in Abhinavagupta’s Tantric 
Sources’, in Eli Franco and Isabelle Ratié (eds.), 
Around Abhinavagupta: Aspects of the Intellec-
tual History of Kashmir from Ninth to Eleventh 
Century, pp. 451–495. Berlin: LIT Verlag. 
Trivedi, H.V. 1978. ‘Kalanjar Stone Inscription of 
the Time of Kirtivarman’, Corpus Inscriptionum 
Indicarum VII/3.
Venkatacharya, T. and A.K. Warder. 1967. The  
Ubhayābhisārika or Both Go to Meet: A Satirical 
Monologue or Bhāna by Vararuchi. Madras: V. 
Sambamurthy.
Venkataramanayya, N. 1974. Inscriptions of Andhra 
Pradesh: Warangal District. Hyderabad: Gov-
ernment of Andhra Pradesh.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   220 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 223] ---
Performance-based Śaiva Worship and its Development in the Temple Cults of Angkor221
Vickery, Michael. 1998. Society, Economics and 
Politics in pre-Angkor Cambodia: The 7th–8th 
Centuries. Tokyo: Centre for East Asian Cultural 
Studies for UNESCO.
Yazdani, G. (ed.). 1960. The Early History of the 
Deccan, Vol. VII-XI. London/Bombay/New 
York: Oxford University Press.Zakharov, Anton O. 2019. ‘The Earliest Dated Cam -
bodian Inscription K. 557/600 from Angkor 
Borei, Cambodia: An English Translation and 
Commentary’, BOCTOK (Oriens) 1: 66–80.
06_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   221 11/2/22   3:37 PM

--- [Page 224] ---
Chapter 7
Libraries or Fire Shrines? Reinterpreting the Function of  
‘Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples  
from the Prism of Early Śaivism1
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri,  
and Olivier Cunin
introduction
A unique feature of Cambodian temple com-
plexes dating from the early to the late An-
gkorian periods was a small annex building 
(of brick and sometimes stone or laterite) with ven -
tilation holes, built in the southeastern quarter of 
the main temple, which scholars have tentatively 
called either a ‘library’ or a ‘fire shrine’. These enig-
matic structures and their function call for further 
investigation. 
In what follows we tentatively seek to estab -
lish the original function of those structures, and 
its possible evolution from the early Angkorian 
through the Angkorian period, by analysing their 
peculiar architectural features against the back-
ground of the Sanskrit inscriptional record from 
the Khmer domains and Sanskrit transmitted texts 
from South Asia describing the observances and 
ritual practices of (Pāśupata or Pāśupata-influ-
enced) early Śaivism. We do not deny the possi -
bility that (some of) these annex buildings might 
have functioned as manuscript repositories, but 
rather argue that they served predominantly (or, 
perhaps, even simultaneously) as sacred spaces for 
specific Śaiva rituals, including ash-related rituals 
of the Pāśupata sect, as well as initiation- and ho-
ma-rituals.
Having first analysed the architectural fea-
tures of the annex buildings and similar struc -
1. We wish to express our sincere thanks to Peter Sharrock 
and Hiram Woodward for reading an early draft of this 
chapter and making useful suggestions. Any mistakes are 
ours.tures, for which we propose a threefold taxonomy, 
we review the interpretations thus far advanced 
by scholars on the basis of both archaeological 
data and Sanskrit inscriptions from the ancient 
Khmer domains, and start to elaborate our own in 
terms of a possible dual function for the buildings. 
Then we look for traces of Pāśupata practices and 
their underlying ideology in the Khmer temple 
architecture, in particular in the annex buildings 
under scrutiny, by matching the archaeological 
data with textual data, including Pāśupata texts 
and early Śaiva sources like the Śivadharmottara. 
We conclude by elaborating on the importance of 
sacred fire and the bestowal of the Śaiva gnosis by 
the ācārya in the Pāśupata initiation ritual, which 
may have provided one of the raisons d’être for 
the annex buildings, and by giving a brief survey 
of the archaeological finds recovered from some of those buildings, which would seem to support 
their use for homa rituals.
architectural features and 
functions of the annex buildings
The small annex sanctuaries built within Khmer 
temple complexes, which have been variously re-
ferred to in secondary literature as ‘library build-
ings’ or ‘fire shrines’, are usually placed in the front 
of the main entrance on the right side of the central 
shrine(s) of the monument (i.e., at the visitor’s 
left), and when there are two such buildings, they 
are located on the right and left side of the central 
shrine(s). See Fig. 7.1  for the location and typical 
plan of this building at Preah Ko, and Appendix 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   222 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 225] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples223
7.2 (‘Brief Survey of the Annex Buildings in Khmer 
Temples’) at the end of this chapter.2
While proposing a taxonomical categorization 
of these annex buildings into three types—viz. A 
(mainly or distinctively early Angkorian, yet pos-
sibly pre-Angkorian in origin), B (mainly Ang -
korian), and C (late Angkorian, and not so wide-
spread)—here we only examine some key examples 
of ‘Type A’ and ‘Type B’ buildings with or without 
ascetic imagery on their exterior, variation in the 
design of the ventilation hole, and modifications in 
the architecture (see Appendix 7.1, ‘Photographic 
Database of Annex Buildings in Khmer Temples’, 
and Appendix 7.2). For the sake of developing our 
argument, we also briefly discuss the buildings 
called ‘lodging stations’ (gîte d’étape) or ‘resthouse 
temples’ (chapelles de gîte d’étape).
The ‘Type A’ annex buildings that are seen in 
Khmer temples have several unusual architectur -
2. To avoid any confusion, it is uniquely to these struc -
ture
s that we refer to as ‘annex buildings’ in this chapter. 
For an in-depth discussion on the architecture of Bayon 
style annex buildings, see Cunin 2004; for Banteay Kdei 
temple specifically, see Arahi 2000.al features. The building is located in association 
with the central sanctuary in the first enclosure. 
The structure has one western entrance, facing 
the central shrine. Generally, no false doors are 
seen on the walls of this structure. The walls are 
usually much thicker than the other buildings of 
the temple complex (up to 1.4  m). The building 
has square or diamond shaped holes in the walls 
as well as in the simple corbelled vaulted-roof on 
all sides,3 and a chimney-like interior (Fig. 7.2b).  
The only images carved on the ‘Type A’ building 
are a row of ascetics sculpted into the brickwork of 
the external walls and the superstructure. All the 
ascetics are seated in cross-legged position, sup -
ported by a yogapaṭṭa (meditation support strap to 
hold the posture for long period of time) and their 
hands are held in añjalīmudrā or prayer posture. 
Sometimes a stone piece (Fig. 7.3 ) is found with 
only ascetic imagery that would have been placed 
in front of the ventilation holes. Ascetic figures, 
usually referred to as ṛṣis in modern scholarly lit-
3. The only exceptions are 13th-century Banteay Kdei and 
tower 64 of Banteay Chhmar, where the roof is a crowned tower (Cunin 2004: 58).
Fig. 7.1: Annex building at 9th-century Preah Ko temple placed in the southeastern corner of the second enclosure 
of the temple. (Drawing: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   223 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 226] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin224
Fig. 7.2: ‘Type A ’ building at 9th-century Preah Ko (a) with an interior-like chimney (b), displaying a row of 
ascetics at the top level (c) and possibly at the lower level (d), square shaped holes on the wall (e) and 1.4 m thick 
wall (f). (Photos: Shivani Kapoor)
Fig. 7.3: Ventilation piece in stone with ascetic imagery from Prasat Tram Neak (IK 578.03) at the 
east of Siem Reap. Possibly 10th century based on the yogapaṭṭa. Angkor National Museum, Siem 
Reap. CA no. 365, N. 1768. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   224 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 227] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples225
erature, are found in profusion on reliefs, cornice, 
and pediments of Khmer temples throughout the 
Angkorian period, and are usually accompanied 
by various other images of deities or merely re-
garded as a decorative motif. On these structures 
this simple band of ascetic figures stands out as a 
distinguishing mark (Fig. 7.2 a).
The development of the ascetic figure with 
a yogapaṭṭa seemingly coincides with the 
early phase of Śaivism in Cambodia, when the 
Pāśupata tradition still held a prominent place 
in the socioreligious ladscape. To our knowledge, 
the earliest depiction of an ascetic figure with 
a yogapaṭṭa and possibly holding a club is 
on N11  temple at Sambor Prei Kuk (Fig. 7.4 ). 
Though the club is traditionally associated with 
the iconography of Lakulīśa as a teacher, this 
identification has thus far not been proposed for 
the Khmer figures (Kapoor 2019 ).
Although, as we stated above, the annex build-
ings are distinctively Angkorian, their construction 
possibly began during the pre-Angkorian period, 
as excavations at the site of Sambor Prei Kuk (ca. 
7th–8 th century) seem to suggest (see Shimoda 
and Shimamoto 2012 : 35). Excavations conduct -
ed on a mound located west of shrine N10  have 
revealed a brick structure. The upper part of the 
structure is collapsed but its base and lower part 
are still in good condition. The building consists 
of a main chamber and an antechamber attached 
to its western side. Shimoda, who is working on 
the excavations, thinks that the construction of 
this building is relatively early even though it was 
built after the construction of the main sanctuary, 
and underwent modifications in the course of time 
(ibid.: 35 ; Fig. 7.18 ). He argues:
This building introduces an asymmetrical 
dimension in the southeast quadrant of the 
temple layout and it faces to west. Such char-
acteristics are common to the so-called ‘library’ 
structures [annex buildings] in Khmer temples. 
These library buildings usually also have open-
ings for ventilation, especially on their left sides, 
a characteristic shared with initial stage of this 
building with its open-air pillared structure. 
(ibid.)
This would be the first known annex building in 
Khmer temple architecture. More excavations are needed to understand the exact number and spread 
of such buildings during pre-Angkorian times.4
Annex buildings continued to be built during 
the later period of Khmer temple architecture with 
some morphological transformations (from Type 
A to Type B) sometime during the second half of 
the 10th century, but always in association with the 
central sanctuary.5 Examples are seen at 10 th-cen-
tury Koh Ker, Banteay Srei, and 11 th-century Preah 
Vihear (Fig. 7.5 ). The square/diamond shaped holes 
were replaced by a fenêtre gisante, a rectangular 
kind of balustrade window at the roof level of the 
annex buildings6 along with the windows on its 
walls. A small antechamber and sometimes a false 
door were added to the building. In spite of the 
architectural modifications, the iconographic as -
sociation with ascetic imagery continued. Instead 
of the row of seated figures, the ascetics are now 
depicted on the lintel of the main entrance door 
and on its column bases, as seen at Preah Vihear 
temple (Fig. 7.6 ), or above the false windows, as 
seen at the Bayon (Fig. 7.7 ). 
Both Type A and B buildings establish the as-
sociation with ascetics and denote some functional 
aspects possibly linked to the use of fire, i.e. a ven-
tilation system made by holes or a particular type 
of balustrade windows, and ritual dependence on 
the central sanctuary within the temple complex.
Type C building is larger in size and is not as 
widespread as the first two types. The building is 
usually built on a high platform accessed by one 
or two staircases from the main axis and is placed 
between the second and third enclosure of the 
temples. This type is seen at Angkor Wat, Beng 
Mealea, the Bayon, and Banteay Chhmar (see Ap-
pendix 7.1). None of these buildings has any ascetic 
imagery or any openings for ventilation. Balustrade 
windows have possibly replaced the small openings 
in these buildings.7 
4. We would like to thank Kunthea Chhom for bringing 
Shim
oda and Shimamoto’s paper to our notice.
5. See Dag
ens 2003: 193, ill. 161; Soutif 2009: 330.
6. The height of the balustrade window is less than its 
width and is indicative of its ventilator function. The 
regular windows found in the Khmer monuments are of 
different proportions.
7. For an 
in-depth discussion on the architecture of dif -
ferent annex buildings, see Cunin 2004.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   225 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 228] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin226
Fig. 7.4: Ascetic wearing a yogapaṭṭa, and possibly holding a club; West Wall, N-11 Sambor Prei Kuk, 6th–9th 
century, brick and stucco (approx. 50 cm × 50 cm). (Photo: Shivani Kapoor)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   226 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 229] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples227
Fig. 7.5 : ‘Type A ’ annex building at Prasat Pram, Koh Ker (a) and ‘Type B’ annex building at 
Banteay Srei (b) and Preah Vihear (c). (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
Fig. 7.6: (a) Row of ascetics seen on the lintel as well as the base of the columns of ‘Type B’ 
annex building at 11th-century Preah Vihear temple; (b–d) details of the lintel. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   227 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 230] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin228
Besides Type A, B, and C buildings, one more 
specific kind of stone building (of laterite or sand-
stone) was also developed in the Khmer domains. 
This building was originally called a ‘palace’ (palais) 
or a ‘dwelling’ (habitation) by Lunet de Lajonquière 
(1902 : xxviii–xxx), and a dharmaśālā (‘rest house’) 
by Foucher (1903 : 180) and Finot (1925 ). Cœdès 
(1940 ) called it gîte d’étape (‘lodging station’)8 
because of its association with the ancient Khmer 
road network, but also maison avec du feu/maison 
du feu (‘house with/of fire’). The same expression 
has been used by Jacques and Lafond (2004 : 387).9 
A comprehensive study by Hendrickson (2008a) 
refers to these buildings as ‘“resthouse” temples’. 
While admitting a possible religious function asso-
ciated with fire for these buildings, Maxwell makes 
a clear distinction between dharmaśālās and our 
annex buildings based on their usage for either 
portable or permanent fire (Maxwell 2007 ; 2009 : 
150; Fig. 7.8 ).
8. See also Dagens 2003: 70.
9. The Engl
ish version (2007: 263) has ‘the house of Fire’.Though Jayavarman VII seems to have commis-
sioned many of them, they were already being men -
tioned in the reign of Sūryavarman II early in the 
11th century (Cunin 2004 : 444). These structures 
are built at regular intervals along the main roads 
of the Khmer Empire, which presumably led them 
to being used as resthouses.10 The Sanskrit name 
for them in the associated inscriptions (such as at 
Preah Khan) is either ‘house of fire’ (hutabhujaḥ 
ālayaḥ, vahneḥ ālayaḥ, vahnigṛha) or ‘caravanserai’ 
(upakāryā) (Maxwell 2007 : 32–33). On the basis 
of the archaeological context and interpretations 
by previous scholars, Hendrickson (2008 a: 73) 
assumes a dual function for these structures as 
both fire shrines and (out)posts, postal stations, 
or inns that played a role within the Angkorian 
transport system. The architecture of these build-
ing is significantly different from the other types 
and consists of a long, wide vaulted hall with an 
10. For instance, those regular-spaced buildings dotted 
the ro
yal road that linked Angkor to the Phimai sanctu -
ary in modern Thailand. On the Khmer road system, see 
Hendrickson 2008b.
Fig. 7.7: Row of ascetics seen above the false window of the annex building BY50 and BY51 at the 13th-century 
Bayon temple. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar) 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   228 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 231] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples229
Fig. 7.8: ‘Resthouse’ at 13th-century Preah Khan temple of Jayavarman VII. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
entrance at the front and row of windows along one 
wall, sometimes with small ventilation grills above, 
followed by a window chamber at the end with its 
own entrance in the back wall and surmounted 
by a temple tower. Since these structures appar -
ently housed both statues (in the sanctum under 
the crowned tower) and fire (in the long chamber 
ventilated by large windows), they were used as 
staging posts or repositories for sacred fires that 
were carried in procession (Jacques and Lafond 
2007 : 263; Maxwell and Poncar 2006 : 132–137 ), 
such as the one depicted on the reliefs of Angkor 
Wat and the Bayon (Jacques and Lafond 2007 : 26; 
Fig. 7.9), or those mentioned in the Preah Khan 
inscription (st. 122 –126 , Maxwell 2007 : 84–85). To 
the best of our knowledge, none of these buildings 
were inscribed.identification of annex buildings 
(type a and b) as ‘library buildings’
The identification of Type A annex building was 
first proposed at the beginning of the 20 th century 
by Lunet de Lajonquière (1902 : xxx–xxxi), who 
called these structures ‘libraries’ (bibliothèques) 
with small openings serving as lighting shafts for 
reading. This identification was not based on any 
inscriptional evidence. 
On the basis of two 10 th-century inscriptions, 
Cœdès too identified these structures as ‘librar -
ies’.11 The first inscription, K. 958 (947  CE), comes 
from Prasat Kôk Čak, just off the road from Phnom 
Penh to Siem Reap, about 6 km from Siem Reap, 
11. IC, VII: 141; Cœdès 1911: 405.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   229 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 232] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin230
and mentions the establishment of a pustakāśrama, 
literally a ‘resting place for books’, or a ‘building 
for books’.12 The inscription says that this type of 
building was erected by Hiraṇyaruci, but does not 
indicate its exact location:
(31)  hiraṇyarucinā tena  
pure rudramahā[laye] /
(32)  sthāpitaṃ vidhinā liṅgaṃ 
śrībha
dreśvarasaṃjñakam // XVI
(33)  sa pinākipade śreṣṭha- 
pure rudramahālaye /
12. The term pustakāśrama  does n ot figure among the 
Sanskrit words for ‘library’ found in the Monier-Williams 
Sanskrit-English Dictionary  (such as e.g. granthakuṭī , pus -
takāgāra , vidyākośagṛha , etc.). A library is also known as 
a granthālaya  or a pustakālaya : cf. Datta 1960: 3, and De 
Simini 2016: 143–145.(34)  rudrāśramatribhuvana- 
sthāneśānapurādiṣu // XVII
(35)  liṅgāny arccāś śivādīnāṃ  
nyadhāl liṅgapurādiṣu /
(36)  śrāṇāśraya ca śraminām  
āśramaṃ pustakāśramam // XVIII
Goodall’s (2017 : 138 ) translation:
This Hiraṇyaruci erected, following the [appro-
priate] rites, in Rudramahālaya a liṅga named 
Śrī-Bhadreśvara. In Pinākipada, in Śreṣṭhapura, 
in Rudramahālaya, in Rudrāśrama, Tribhuva-
nasthāna, Īśānapura and other towns, he set up 
liṅgas and cult-statues of Śiva and other deities, 
a place [for distribution] of cooked food, an 
āśrama for [the repose of] the weary and a li-
brary (pustakāśramam).
The second inscription, K. 355  from Prasat Khna 
(Preah Vihear province, second half of the 10 th 
Fig. 7.9: Depiction of the sacred fire being carried out along the road or between temples. Inner gallery relief on 
the Eastern side between BY23 and BY24, 13th-century Bayon temple. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   230 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 233] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples231
century), is important as it is inscribed on the 
doorjamb of the annex building and identifies that 
very building as a pustakāśrama (Cœdès 1911 : 405; 
Fig. 7.10):
hiraṇyarucinā te(20)[na] **** ~ – ~ –
****** j[e]na kṛto yaṃ pustakāśramaḥ // XXII
adhyāpakādhyetṛhitaiḥ (21) **** ~ – ~ –
***** vānāṃ śāstrāṇāṃ śastabuddhinā // XXIII
Goodall’s (2017 : 142 ) translation:
That Hiraṇyaruci, of trained intellect 
(śastabuddhinā), who knew … (…jñena), cre-
ated this library (kṛto ’yaṃ pustakāśramaḥ) 
[[filled]] with [[books]] beneficial for teachers 
and students [and] belonging to … disciplines 
(…vānāṃ śāstrāṇāṃ).
Cœdès (1911 : 406) suggested that the word āśrama 
in the inscription could be translated as a ‘building’ 
rather than a monastery or hermitage: 
In Cambodian epigraphy, the term âçrama  
seems to have a rather vague meaning and of-ten designates something other than a monas-
tery or a hermitage. In many cases, the word 
‘edifice’ is the one that best translates it. Also, 
pustakâçramaḥ corresponds quite exactly to 
‘library’. On the other hand, the presence of 
the determinative ayam leaves no doubt as to the location of the monument where the man-
uscripts were deposited: the small kiosk bear-
ing the inscription was, therefore, surely the 
library of the temple of Pràsàt Khnà.
13 
 
13. French original: ‘Dans l’épigraphie cambodgienne, 
le terme âçrama  semble avoir un sens assez vague et de -
signer souvent autre chose qu’un monastère ou un ermi -
tage. Dans bien des cas, le mot « édifice » est celui qui le 
traduit le mieux. Aussi pustakâçramaḥ  correspond-il assez 
exactement à « bibliothèque ».  D’autre part, la présence 
du déterminatif ayam  ne laisse pas de doute sur l’empla -
cement du monument où les manuscrits étaient déposés: 
le petit édicule qui porte l’inscription était donc sûrement 
la bibliothèque du temple de Pràsàt Khnà.’ (Compare the 
word dravyāśrama  in K. 366 [ IC, V: 294] of Wat Phu, which 
Cœdès translates as ‘treasure building’). 
Fig. 7.10: Annex building at Prasat Khna displaying ‘Type A ’ architectural features. (Photo: Shivani Kapoor)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   231 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 234] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin232
Following Cœdès, Goodall (2017 : 144) has hypoth-
esized that these buildings, which he calls ‘tem -
ple-libraries’, might have been places for inscrib -
ing, copying, and storing books/manuscripts. To 
account for the peculiar architecture of the small 
diamond/square shaped openings on the walls of 
the annex buildings, he says:
Returning for a moment to the seemingly win-
dowless building that Hira ṇyaruci’s inscription 
labels as a library, it might appear that it was 
not intended as a well-lit space for sitting down 
and poring over books, 
but rather as a place of 
storage, for the small diamond-shaped holes in 
its sides […] seem, at least to a modern viewer 
used to the overcast skies of Northern Europe, 
to be designed for ventilation rather than light. 
But Lunet de Lajonquière’s account of the fea-
tures typical of such library buildings across the 
Khmer world suggests that those small open-
ings were in fact intended for lighting the large 
vaulted spaces within, and that they are, in oth-
er comparable buildings, replaced by windows 
screened by balustrades (1902, xxx). […] So 
these may really have been intended as spaces 
for study, sufficiently lit, given the strong sun-
shine of the region, by little more than slits in 
their sides. One other misapprehension should 
perhaps be touched upon. It has been men-tioned to me, but I can unfortunately not re-
member by whom, that some comparable and 
similarly positioned (opening to the West on 
either side of the Eastern approach to the main 
sanctuary) buildings at other Khmer sites may 
bear signs of having had fires lit in them, which 
might seem surprising if they were really plac-
es for the storage and study of books. I do not 
know if this is true, but if any such buildings 
did regularly have fires lit in them (the South-
East being after all the direction of Agni and 
the place of the kitchen in South Indian tem-ples, such as in the great temple at Tanjore), this 
does not necessarily preclude their having been 
used for the storage of books, for hanging palm-
leaf manuscripts above fire places, where smoke 
and dry warmth would minimise the attacks of 
insects and fungus, was evidently commonly practised in some parts of South India.
We will return to the dual function of the buildings, 
i.e. as both ‘libraries’ and fire shrines, as well as to the evaluation of the idea that literary activities 
might have been carried out there, later in this 
chapter. 
Drawing on Goodall’s analysis of the annex 
buildings quoted above, De Simini has matched 
the epigraphic and archaeological evidence of the 
Khmer structures with the mention of a small 
building called ‘abode of knowledge’ (vidyālaya)14 
in verse 117  of Chapter 2 of the early Śaiva text 
Śivadharmottara (ca. 7 th century). She suggests 
that the Śivadharmottara ‘alludes to the existence 
of a small building that is apparently annexed to the 
compound where the donation of the manuscript 
is to take place, and which may qualify as a small 
manuscript repository’ (De Simini 2016 : 116). The 
measurements of this building—whether it applies 
to breadth, length, or both not being specified—are 
eight hands or approximately 3.6  metres (ibid.: 142). 
On this basis, she concludes that: 
The aforementioned example from Cambodia 
illustrates that historical evidence has proven 
from an early date that there were ‘storerooms’ 
of manuscripts that were attached to religious 
and educational institutions and financed 
through private donations. (ibid.: 143)
Further, De Simini (ibid.: 155) resorts to an early 
Sanskrit inscription (K. 359 , prob. 6 th century) 
from the Stung Treng province of Cambodia by 
the (Pāśupata?) Brahmin Soma śarman (st. IIIa),15 
to link the ‘abode of knowledge’ to ‘the ritualistic 
donation of manuscripts to a temple for storage 
purposes as well as for their ritual recitation’, and 
suggests that the building ‘could indeed be a small 
library in which the donated manuscripts were 
14. Compare the synonyms vidy āsiṃhāsana (‘lion-throne 
of knowledge’, 2.23, 114), vidy āvimāna (‘vehicle of knowl-
edge’, 2.45), vidy āratnakara ṇḍaka, (‘jewel box of knowl -
edge’, 2.112), vidyākośasam āśraya (‘storehouse of knowledge’, 
2.109), vidyāvāsagṛha (‘house in which knowledge abides’, 
2.111) and vidyākośagṛha (‘treasure-house of knowledge’, 
2.113), which ‘while seemingly only indicating the container 
of a manuscript in this case, could indeed also be employed 
to designate a “larger” repository for more texts, which in 
fact we would call a library’ (De Simini 2016: 141).
15. Barth 1885: 28–31; cf. Majumdar 1953: 18–19. The name 
Somaśarman appears to be associated in the Indian sub -
continent with both Lakulīśa, founder of the Pāśupata 
movement, and a Kāpālika lineage: see Törzsök 2020: 36–38.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   232 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 235] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples233
stored (and worshipped)’. The inscription, which 
might even predate the Śivadharmottara as we 
know it, seems to reflect the description of ritual 
activities in the vidy ādānādhyāya mentioned in 
that text, namely the erection of a liṅga as well as 
‘the donation of manuscripts to a temple and their 
preservation in a spot from which, as the intimi-
dating character of the last line suggests, nobody 
is allowed to remove them’ (ibid.). 
Besides the Prasat Khna, Prasat Kôk Čak, and 
Stung Treng inscriptions, several epigraphic doc-
uments mention physical books, being copied and 
stored in a library, but do not specifically indicate 
any building.16 The 12 th-century inscription K. 364  
from Ban That (Champasak province, Laos) also 
refers to books kept in an āśrama (Goodall 2017 : 
148), but does not indicate any specific location or 
building:
Last face (stanza numeration uncertain):
niśśeṣaśāstrair likhitais sanāthā[n] (54) = - ~ - - 
~ ~ - ~ - ān /
sa pustakān adhyayanācchidārthaṃ tatrāśra- 
me ’nekavidhān acaiṣīt //
Dans cet āśrama, pour que l’étude y fut pour-
suivie sans interruption, il réunit un grand 
nombre de manuscrits traitant de toutes les 
sciences.... (trans. Finot 1912: 28) 
Stanza 19 is striking as it presents—perhaps, de -
liberately punning?—an association between this 
āśrama, the study of books, and the performance 
of sacrifices that cause a ‘fragrant smoke’ to arise 
above it:
vidyāpavarggavihit āpacitiprabandhe /
yasyāśrame ’navarat āhutidhūmagandhe /
durgg āgame ṣu matibhedak ṛtārthan ītyā /
vidyārthin āṃ vivadat āṃ dhvanir utsasarppa //
Above his āśrama, in which there was a con-
stant stream of [donative] acts of honour per-
formed [by graduating students] at the moment 
of 
concluding their studies, which was fragrant 
with the smoke of an uninterrupted sequence 
of sacrifices, there rose [constantly] the sound of students debating over difficult [passages of] 
16. Such as, e.g., Banteay Srei inscription K. 842 of 890 
śaka (I
C, I: 147).transmitted texts (durg āgame ṣu) in a fashion 
that was successful in accordance with the 
var-
ious schools (matibhedak ṛtārthan ītyā). (trans. 
Goodall 2017: 149)
Although we venture to speculate that the com -
pound vidy āpavargga could punningly allude to the 
ritual of vidyādāna,17 the evidence is too tenuous 
to associate the inscription, mentioning a particu-
lar āśrama linked to the storage and study of texts 
and manuscripts, with one of the annex buildings 
discussed here. 
The 11th-century inscription K. 278 (stanza 
23) mentions the donation of a beautiful book 
by Śivavindu to be kept in the main sanctuary 
(vimāna) of a Bhadreśa temple (Barth 1885: 116; 
cf. Goodall 2017: 148). Even though we have 
several inscriptions associated in some way with 
the concept of a library or storehouse for books, 
only one is inscribed on the annex building itself, 
namely K. 355.
alternative views on the annex 
buildings
In this section we will first discuss the scholarly 
views advancing an alternative interpretation of the 
annex buildings as fire shrines, then put forward 
our own hypothesis, which will be elaborated in 
detail in the final sections of this chapter.
Claude Jacques (Jacques and Lafond 2007 : 20) 
argued that the term ‘bibliothèque’, which dates 
back to the early 20 th century, did not necessarily 
indicate the ancient function of these buildings, 
which were rather to be identified as homa struc-
tures:
In the southeast quadrant of the enclosure 
there is usually, in temples of the Angkor pe-
riod, what is mistakenly called a ‘library’ but 
17. The compound, translated by Goodall as ‘at the 
moment of concluding their studies’, could hide a double 
meaning: cf. Monier-Williams s.v. apavarga , ‘gift, donation’, 
which may be interpreted as a synonym of vidyā  (therefore, 
vidyāpavarga  = vidyādāna ?). The alternative translation 
could thus be: ‘Above his āśrama , in wh ich there was a 
constant stream of acts of honour performed for the sake 
of the “gift of knowledge”’.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   233 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 236] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin234
which is a Fire temple. Just as was the custom 
in India, Fire had to be ritually re-kindled each 
morning before the ceremonial worship of the 
shrine’s main deity, but in Cambodia from the 
ninth century onwards the sacred fire had its 
own dedicated sanctuary. There must also have 
been kitchens close by to cook the god’s food, 
but as they would certainly have been tempo-
rarily shacks made of perishable materials, no 
trace of them has survived.
Jacques’ interpretation is not based on any inscrip-
tional evidence but relies on the architecture of 
the building. 
In his PhD dissertation on the Bayon type of 
monuments, Olivier Cunin identified those build-
ings as fire shrines. However, inscription K. 355  
makes a stronger case for the structure at Prasat 
Khna being a library building.18 On the basis of 
the architectural features of the building, Cunin 
elaborates on this problem as follows:
D’autres indices semblent cependant contre-
dire cette hypothèse et laissent douter que 
l’ensemble de ce type d’édifice était bien le lieu 
où étaient conservés les manuscrits des monu-
ments. En effet, il n’est pas rare de trouver les 
traces d’un piédestal d’une idole accompagné 
des logements d’un dais. Il semble donc que ces derniers étaient plus des lieux de culte que des 
lieux de conservation de manuscrits. La pré-
sence d’un système d’aération pour faciliter la 
combustion d’un feu rituel renforce cette idée. 
(Cunin 2004: 59–60)
19 
18. And yet, inscription K. 661 ( IC, I: 1 97), engraved on the 
East Gopura, suggests that fire rituals dedicated to Śiva were 
among the daily activities going on at the temple: see side 
B, st. LXXIV: śivārcan āgniho
trāditapa
syāsādhan āni ya ḥ / 
mantratantr āṇi saṃśodhya v idhaye ’ra ñjayad  dhiy ā //, ‘ Par 
l’effet de son activit é inte llectuelle, il [King Śrī Sūryavar -
man I] fit briller, en les éditan t pour la c élébrati on des rites, 
les mantra et les tantra , guides des pratiques religieuses des 
ascètes, à commencer par le culte de Śiva et le s oblations 
au Feu’ (trans. Bhattacharya 1961: 47); side D, st. CVIIIab: 
śivāgnigurup ūjāsu ni punaḥ … ‘[Śrī Kavīndrapaṇḍita] habile 
à célébrer les cérémonies en l’honneur de Śiva, d’Agni, et de 
son maître…’ (trans. IC , I: 218); compare side A, st. LXIV.  
19. English translation: ‘Other indications, however, seem 
to contradict this hypothesis and leave us doubting that 
the whole of this type of building was indeed the place 
where the manuscripts of the monuments were preserved. Dominique Soutif in his PhD dissertation devotes 
a section to fire rituals and fire shrines in ancient 
Cambodia, and returns to these issues in a 2017  
paper (Soutif 2009, 2017). He discusses occurrenc-
es of such terms as vahnyāgāra and agnigṛha in 
the Khmer epigraphical corpus (Soutif 2009: 326–
327),20 noting that the latter may indicate the house 
of fire associated with a temple, such as in the case 
of Śaṅkarapāda (K. 485, 944 śaka, st. LX; Jacques 
1968: 620). He also mentions inscriptions referring 
to the installation of sacred fires in temple infra -
structures, for instance at Śrī Bhadreśvarāśrama 
(K. 258A, 1001 śaka). Noting that no permanent 
crucibles have ever been recovered from Khmer 
temples, he argues that the Khmer expression kralā 
homa attested on inscriptions corresponds to the 
Sanskrit agnigṛha and vahnyāgāra in the context of 
the palace, or to a hall in a temple (ibid.: 328). On 
the basis of inscription K. 1065A, he argues that the 
expression kralā vraḥ vleṅ (‘salle du Feu sacr é’ or 
‘aire du Feu sacré’) denoted an annex building at-
tached to a sanctuary rather than a simple sacrificial 
area, and that it corresponded to the expressions  
agni-niketana/ -āgāra and homasth āna/yagasth āna 
encountered in Śaiva ritual treatises from India 
(ibid.: 328). He further analyses the expression 
pada ḥ sthāna jā ’āśrama vle ṅ in K. 691, translated 
by Cœd ès (IC,  IV: 151, fn. 4 ) as ‘l’ āśrama o ù réside 
le Feu sacr é’, as referring to a building installed for 
a sacred fire in a temple i.e. the southern pi édroit 
of the annex building of the temple of Trapeang 
Ropou (Lunet De Lajonquière 1911: 132). On the
 
basis of the combined inscriptional evidence of 
K. 691 and K. 937, as well as Dagens’ observation 
that the architectural features responded to the 
needs of aeration rather than illumination (Dagens 
2003: 193), Soutif cautiously supports the view that 
the libraries may be identified as fire shrines, yet 
without unduly generalizing, as other such annex 
buildings could have been libraries indeed, like 
Indeed, it is not uncommon to find traces of a pedestal of 
an idol accompanied by the sections of a platform. It seems, 
then, that these were more places of worship than places of 
preservation of manuscripts. The presence of an aeration 
system to facilitate the burning of a ritual fire strengthens 
this idea’.
20. Cf. als
o agniveśman , in K. 432 st. V (Soutif 2017: 10).
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   234 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 237] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples235
for example the one at Prasat Khna (Soutif 2009: 
330– 331). 
The inscriptions mentioned above might shed 
some light on the ‘Type A’ buildings. K. 937 , found 
at Prasat Srangé, near Preah Ko, Roulos, is the ear-
liest inscription (883  CE) associated to an annex 
building, and is inscribed on the left door-jamb 
of a ‘Type A’ building. The inscription introduc -
es the fire priest of King Indravarman I, ācārya 
Nandikācārya, a man of great asceticism (IC,  
IV: 46 ):
rājā rājadhirājo yaś  
Śrīndravarmmeti viśrutaḥ /
ācāryyo nandikācāryyaḥ  
taddhotā sumahātapāḥ // I
śarakhāṣṭāṅkite śāke  
devāgnir ṇnandikeśvaraḥ /
sthāpito vidhinā tena  
hutvāgniñ ca sadārccayet // II
[pa]ñcatanmātram asyedaṃ  
pañcakāman dadāti yaiḥ /
patreṇa kampitaṃ tebhyaḥ  
suvarṇnavyajanāni ca // III
The king of kings, Śri Indravarman had a 
priest called Nandikācārya who practiced 
great austerities. In the śaka year 805 (883 CE), 
he (Nandika) established, according to pre-
cept, a particular sacred fire, devāgni [named] 
Nandikeśvara [as his personal fire]. May he al-
ways worship [the god] after sacrificing to the 
fire! Rich rewards such as fans made of gold will 
be granted to those who will fan the sacred fire, 
[to keep it alive] even with a simple palm leaf. 
(trans. Maxwell 2009: 162–163)
The interesting element in the inscription is that 
the priest is establishing a particular sacred fire, 
remaining personally associated with the fire and 
keeping it alive, possibly with the help of his disci-
ples. Besides Maxwell, Soutif (2009 : 323) too notes 
the personal character of the cult reserved to the 
fire, namely the relationship between the founder 
and the sacred fire, and also hypothesizes that 
Nandikeśvara is to be regarded as a divinity ven -
erated through an ancillary cult of the fire, probably 
related to Śiva (ibid.).
Some 300 years later an association between fire, 
an ācārya, and a building is found in an inscription 
of 1216  CE (N1/17 , written by Madhurendra) en-graved on the right-hand doorjamb of the structure 
BC45  at Banteay Chhmar, illustrated in Cunin’s 
archaeological reconstruction (Fig. 7.11 ). The struc-
ture is in the southeast and displays all the features 
of an annex building. Architecturally this structure 
is a ‘Type A’ building’ with ventilation holes. A row 
of ascetics appears on the superstructure next to the 
Rāvaṇānugrāhamūrti and above the lintel. 
In a similar manner to K. 937 , the inscription 
states the name of the donor, names the sacred fire 
after his personal vision, and ends with a list of 
anticipated rewards:
vraḥ vleṅ svargga
iman divaś śrīmadhurendras ūrir agniṃ patan-
taṃ samaālam atra /
śrīvīraśaktyāgamanena so ’ham adrākṣam 
aṣṭātriśaśāṅkar ūpaiḥ // 1
dṛṣṭo 
mayā dīpitadiṅmukhyo ’gnir divaḥ patan 
śrījayavarmmarājye /
atyadbhutaṃ yatsaphalāni manye jātañ ca ne-
tre ca kulañ ca me syuḥ // 2
The sacred Fire from heaven.
I myself, Śrī-Madhurendrasūri, saw this Fire 
falling from heaven, here, at the time of the ar-
rival of Śrī-Vīraśakti in 1138 [Śaka].
I have seen the Fire lighting up the directions of 
space [and] falling from heaven into the king-
dom of Śrī-Jayavarman—a great wonder, which I believe will entail good results, [namely] high 
birth, two [good] eyes, and eminent family. 
May these be mine! (trans. Maxwell 2009: 155)
Noting the strong similarities between inscriptions 
K. 937 and N1/17 , Maxwell (2009 : 159) suggests that, 
while the name Agni translates vraḥ vleṅ, divaḥ 
patan is a Khmer rendering of the Sanskrit word 
svarg(g)a, and both of these 
were clearly intended to convey an alternative 
conception of fire-god, one that had special sig-
nificance for him as the expression of what he 
had witnessed. The first among the unusual as-
pects of this inscription is, therefore, that the in-
dividual fire named in it was a particular mani-
festation of sacred fire that is not mentioned in 
any other Jayavarman VII inscription. 
The nature of the fire is not easy to define here, but 
Maxwell thinks the essential reason for engraving 
this text on the building is to explain and define the 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   235 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 238] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin236
sacred fire associated with it. Another short inscrip -
tion, N2 , names the sacred fire (ibid.: 145–146 ). It is 
inscribed on the left side door pillar of the entrance 
to a now collapsed building BC15 , placed in the 
southeastern quadrant of the first enclosure of the 
temple, which houses a ventilation system in its 
architecture (Fig. 7.12 ). This building is a ‘Type B’ 
building with some variations.
These two inscriptions leave no doubt that 
structures 45 and 15  were fire shrines, where the 
sacred fire, to which offerings must have been reg-
ularly made to the accompaniment of mantras, was 
kept burning (ibid.: 162). Both the Prasat Srangé 
and Banteay Chhmar inscriptions are important 
as they are inscribed on the doorjamb of the annex 
building and identify that particular building upon 
which it is inscribed as the one where the sacred 
fire was established.21 Maxwell (ibid.: 33) has dis-
21. In his work on the Banteay Chhmar inscriptions, 
Maxwell (2009: 171) argues that ‘fire shrines differed from 
temples in their ritual function, in their architecture, in cussed the combination of fire cult and image cult 
in one building in the light of his readings of Ang-
korian inscriptions.22 Like the gods that were rep-
resented by statues, each devāgni was also regarded 
as an individual deity, a particular manifestation 
of fire which had been instituted by, and which 
could even be named after, a person of rank in 
the religious establishment (ibid.: 162; cf. Soutif 
2009 : 323). 
Inscription K. 691  (1002  CE), engraved on the 
piers of south annex building at Prasat Trapeang 
Ropou (Siem Reap province), mentions a certain 
Loñ Dān installing a fire in this very building. He 
their orientation, and in being regarded as independent 
foundations. As such their establishment and that of the 
fire which they housed was recorded and dated in their 
own foundation texts written by the fire-priest himself.’
22. K. 950 ( IC, VI
: 115–118), where Caitanyaśiva and his 
brother are said to have founded a Viṣṇu temple in the 10th 
century; K. 254 ( ibid.: 183, 187–188), mentioning provisions 
for maintaining the fire cult for three statues representing 
Śiva, Viṣṇu, and Devī (cf. Bhattacharya 1961: 147).
Fig. 7.11: Structure 45 situated in the southeastern part of the east complex of the temple. It has a ventilation 
system similar to ‘Type A ’ annex buildings. (3D archaeological reconstruction: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   236 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 239] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples237
presented eight servants to tend the rice fields be-
longing to this fire shrine, which delivered a fixed 
quantity of husked rice daily as sacrifice to the 
sacred fire. Today, we see the mound with some 
brickwork in the southeastern corner in front of 
the central sanctuary, but the old EFEO photo -
graphs (CAM 10148 , 10153 ) clearly show the con-
struction of an independent building much like an 
annex building or fire shrine of BC45  at Banteay 
Chhmar.23 K. 258 , the stele of Samrong, mentions 
the establishment of a sacred fire in the tapova-
na (grove for the ascetic practices) in 1079  at the 
āśrama of the Śiva temple of Bhadreśvara by a fire 
priest called Yogīśvarapaṇdita.24 Here, again, the 
23. K. 691 ( IC, IV: 151). For architecture and archaeology 
of the temple site, see Pottier 2000: 95; for the old photos 
of the site, see Marchal 1931: 614 (pl. CXVB).
24. K. 258 (IC, IV: 175–192). Note that, as we have noted 
above, the word āśrama in this context could be interpreted relationship between a sacred fire, an (ascetic?) 
priest and a building or religious foundation seems 
clear, even though its exact location is not known. 
libraries or fire shrines?
So far, we have one inscription engraved on an 
annex building, calling it a pustakāśrama (Prasat 
Khna, K. 958 ), and three inscriptions (one from 
Prasat Srangé, two from Banteay Chhmar)—or 
four if we include Trapeang Ropou—mentioning 
the same building as a place where the sacred fire 
was established. Does Prasat Khna then represent 
the exception rather than the rule, as suggested by 
Cunin (2004 : 59)? 
Thus, two main opinions have been advanced 
by scholars to understand these buildings: one 
either as ‘religious foundation’ or as ‘building’.
Fig. 7.12: The structures BC15 and BC45 are variants of ‘Type B’ and ‘Type A ’ buildings and are located in 
the southeastern corner of the first enclosure and the Eastern complex of the temple. (3D archaeological 
reconstruction: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   237 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 240] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin238
proposes they were used for holding/storing man-
uscripts, and the other argues that they were fire 
shrines or homa structures. On the one hand, in-
scription K. 355  from Prasat Khna would support 
their identification as libraries. But the archi-
tecture of libraries in the late mediaeval Indian 
subcontinent as well as the textual descriptions of 
earlier libraries do not show any similarities with 
the annex buildings of the Khmer temples, apart 
from, perhaps, the relatively small dimensions of 
such buildings.25 On the other hand, inscriptions 
on the annex buildings mentioning the establish-
ment of a sacred fire open up the possibility of 
the interpretation of this kind of building as a fire 
shrine. Furthermore, the architectural features of 
the buildings—i.e. the venting system and thick 
walls—are perfectly adapted to the use for fire-rit-
uals, and the archaeological finds seem to support 
this (see below). These so-called ‘library’ buildings 
are the only buildings in Khmer temple complexes 
suitable for housing fire.26 
On the basis of the inscription and the archi-
tecture of the building, Goodall (2017 : 144; cf. 
above) attempts to combine the two interpreta -
tions and understands these buildings as libraries 
where manuscripts were copied, stored, and pos-
sibly hanged on the ceiling so as to be fumigated 
by fire. We find this interpretation, attributing 
a ‘dual-function’ to the buildings, to be convinc-
ing. However, differently from Goodall, we also 
25. The most prestigious and important mediaeval library 
of India is the Saraswati Mahal Library at Tanjavur, es -
tablished under the Nayaka kings (1535–1675), which we 
assume would have been modelled on earlier buildings. 
For a synthesis of secondary sources discussing epigraphic 
evidence (mainly from the 11th–13th century) on libraries 
in the Indian subcontinent, see De Simini 2016: 143–145; cf. 
Datta 1960: 42, 182; Sankaranarayanan 1993: 28ff. 
26. While a fuller comparative discussion must be left for 
another occasion, we should like 
to point out here that a 
similar typology of shrines of relatively small size and with 
uncharacteristic ventilation holes has survived in Central 
Java in the period from ca. 8th to early 9th century, namely 
Candi Semar in Dieng and Candi Pawon in the vicinity of, 
and in a straight line with, the Borobudur. Interestingly, 
pawon in Javanese means ‘kitchen’ (i.e., place of the ashes, 
awu), and local people also name this temple as Bajranalan 
(from vajrānala, where ānala = fire); both names suggest 
the possibility that this temple might have functioned as a 
fire-shrine for homa rituals (see Lokesh Chandra 1980: 317).contend that the interiors of these building do 
not have sufficient light for inscribing or reading 
manuscripts. Given the thickness of the walls and 
nature of the small diamond-shaped holes, these 
structures were not intended to be well-lit places 
and any visitor would easily note that almost no 
light filters through them, despite the strong tropi -
cal sunshine. Since the ancient Khmer manuscripts 
are incised, the copyist had to clearly see what he 
was writing and good light was very important; 
thus, it is likely that these activities were carried 
out in open or semi-open spaces, such as pavilions, 
or larger buildings.27 We agree with De Simini’s 
(2016 : 142) observation, in connection with the 
small building mentioned in Śivadharmottara 
2.117  as a vidyālaya, that, although the text is not 
explicit about its precise function, its dimensions 
would be sufficient to qualify it as a library ‘that 
could serve as a storage place for manuscripts 
rather than a place suitable for studying them’.28 
It is not easy to integrate such widely differing 
purposes, but the combined epigraphic, textual, 
and architectural evidence, the doctrinal and ritual 
background, as well as practical aspects connect-
ed with manuscript conservation, may all have 
contributed to shape and define the function of 
these buildings over time. It is not impossible that 
they were originally intended for fire rituals and 
only at a subsequent stage they also became places 
for the storage of manuscripts—the fumigation of 
manuscripts being added as a welcome ‘side-effect’, 
which would have helped the preservation of the 
leaves by eliminating insects and preventing the 
formation of fungi.29 Going back to inscription 
27. Olivier de Bernon, email dated 24 April 2018.
28. Cf. De Si
mini 2016: 142, fn. 348: ‘From the modern 
accounts on traditional libraries we learn, for instance, 
that Jain libraries were limited to small, dark—and some -
times even subterranean—rooms […]. The archaeological 
remains identified as temple libraries in Cambodia have 
limited dimensions, which suggest that these places did 
not allow the use of manuscripts in situ for personal study.’
29. The South Indian practice of hanging palm-leaf 
manuscripts above fire places or in kitchens mentioned 
by Goodall (2017: 144; cf. Dr Perumal’s blog, https://drperu -
mal.wordpress.com/2013/05/10/) was (and is still) known 
in Indonesia, too: see van der Meij 2017: 47: ‘in Lombok, 
lontar manuscripts may be stored in the roof of the kitchen 
so that they are exposed to kitchen smoke to prevent insect 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   238 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 241] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples239
K. 958 from Prasat Kôk Čak, we wonder whether 
the expression pustakāśrama (occurring after 
śraminām āśramaṃ, meaning ‘an āśrama for [the 
repose of] the weary’) could metaphorically allude 
to a ‘resting-place’ for manuscripts, not implying a 
place for the accession and use of the manuscripts, 
i.e. a library, but a building where manuscripts 
were temporarily laid down for periodic ‘servic-
ing’, so to speak, in an environment that might 
have been fumigated most of the time thanks to 
the presence of a sacred fire. But it is also possible 
that these buildings were meant for the permanent 
storage of books in a fumigated environment—the 
premodern equivalent of a low-humidity, pest-free 
controlled microclimate. On the top of that, the 
possible ritual function of such buildings should 
be considered, too. For instance, the Northeast -
ern Indian Buddhist monasteries seem to have 
known small edifices where old and worn-out 
manuscripts were permanently stored. De Simini 
(2016 : 17), summarizing the scholarly discussion 
on this issue, remarks that ‘the British Library 
scrolls [of Gilgit] represented a ritual burial for old, 
“dead” manuscripts, which would have formed a 
sort of “Buddhist genizah”.’30 These books would 
also be worshiped as cult objects, as described in 
such texts as the Śivadharma, which characterizes 
the abode of knowledge (vidy āyatana) ‘as a place 
where the manuscript(s) of the Śaiva knowledge 
will, “like Śiva” ( śivavat, 2.122 ), be worshipped 
daily’ (ibid.: 145).31 To De Simini, it therefore  
appears that Śaivism, too, admitted a ritualization 
damage, but in consequence they become black and dirty 
and seem old while in fact they are not.’ Andrea Acri is 
aware of similar practices in Java and Bali. Agrawala (1984: 
34) describes the practice of hanging fresh palm leaves (that 
is, before their engraving) for several days in a place where 
smoke is emitted to make them insect- and fungus-proof 
in Thailand.
30. De Simini (2016: 17–18, 149–150) presents interpre -
tations of this phenomenon by Solomon, Schopen, and 
Strauch, according to which this building represented a 
combination of genizah and scriptorium, located within 
the precinct of the Buddhist monastery, would have stored 
old or unusable texts while still allowing them to remain 
accessible to the monks.  
31. It is perhaps significant that the text declares the 
worship to be performed thrice daily, at the main sandhyā, 
just like for the observance of bhasmasnāna (see below).of all the main activities connected to the conser-
vation of manuscripts.
Having discussed the observations by previ-
ous scholars with respect to the possible function 
of the annex buildings, in what follows we would 
like to draw attention to some relevant passages of 
Sanskrit sources from the Indian subcontinent to 
advance a hypothesis concerning the origin and 
functions of these buildings in a Khmer religious 
and ritual context dominated by Pāśupata Śaivism 
in the pre-Angkorian period, and its evolution in 
the early and late Angkorian periods.  
matching the textual, epigraphic, 
and architectural datas: pāśupatas 
and rituals relating to fire and ash 
in south and southeast asia
The Pāśupatas were one of the earliest organized 
and widely distributed Śaiva ascetic orders of the 
Indic world in the early mediaeval period. Several 
inscriptions document the spread of this order 
across the Indian subcontinent and beyond to 
Southeast Asia, clearly indicating the missionary 
character of the movement (Bhattacharya 1955 ; 
1961 : 43–76). By the 7 th century, Pāśupata masters 
had been able to secure a place for themselves with 
the Khmer royalty.32 Although one notes the con-
comitant rise to popularity of mainly ritualistic 
Mantramārga Śaivism from the 9 th century on-
wards,33 its influence on the ritual practices of the 
32. One of the earliest inscriptions in Cambodia, K. 604 
(IC, IV: 17–19) of 
627 CE from the reign of Īśānavarman I 
(616–635), founder of the Īśānapura kingdom with Sambor 
Prei Kuk as its capital, commemorates the erection of a liṅga 
by a Brahmin named Vidyāviśesa. According to Cœdès, 
Vidyāviśesa was the first Pāśupata master recorded in the 
Khmer domains. 
33. Bhattacharya 1961; Sanderson 2003–2004: 435. Goodall 
(2015: 28) suggests that the earliest known evidence of the 
introduction of the Mantramārga in Kambujadeśa belongs 
to the middle of the 8th century; however, he (ibid.: 25) 
also notes that, although Mantramārga initiation-names 
ending in - śiva only appear from the late 9th century and 
become common in the 10th, ‘this does not necessarily 
mean that we can conclude with certainty that the Mantra -
mārga only reached the Khmers in the Angkorian period’, 
and that ‘the relatively sparse 
documentation for the late 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   239 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 242] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin240
Khmer court appears to have continued well into 
the 13 th century.34
Our sources for the knowledge of Pāśupata 
doctrine (vidyā, jñāna) and observances (vrata, 
vidhi) are limited to a handful of Sanskrit texts, 
containing both first- and second-hand accounts.35 
From these accounts we know that, in order to 
obtain union with the supreme deity Rudra-Śiva, 
the Pāśupata adept was supposed to perform his 
ascetic observances in five stages while living in the 
following five places: in a temple, among people, 
in an empty house, in the cremation ground, and 
in Rudra (Hara 1966: 3–5). In the first stage, the 
disciple retreats to, and dwells in, a Śaiva temple 
and carry out worship activities including bathing 
in ashes three times a day (bhasmanā triṣavaṇaṃ 
snāyīta, PS 1.2), sleeping in a bed of ashes (bhas- 
mani śayīta, PS 1.3), wearing a garland taken from 
the image of the deity (nirmālya), etc. Some among 
pre-Angkorian period makes it dangerous to make any 
sort of statement about religion, politics, literary taste or 
whatever at that time’ ( ibid.: 26); cf. Sanderson 2003–2004: 
444, who points out that certain iconographical elements 
found in Mantramārgic sources from the subcontinent are 
already attested among the Khmers in the 7th century, ‘well 
before the Mantram ārga reached their shores’.  
34. See Finot 1928: 44 (our translation from the original 
French): ‘It should be noted that the servant of the temple 
must be a Pāśupata Brahmin; thus, one can note the impor -
tance, from the very beginning of the Khmer monarchy, of 
a sect that, more than six centuries later, Tcheou Ta-kouan 
still found flourishing in the capital of Cambodia.’ See also 
Chapter 6 in this volume, and Goodall 2015: 26, recording 
the presence of names of ascetics ending in -rāśi—a marker 
of Atimārga affiliation—in inscriptions throughout the 11th 
century, as well as traces of the doctrines of Pāśupata sub-
groups in 10th-century non-royal caves.
35. These, however, are mainly philosophy-orient-
ed, like the Pāśupatas ūtra (PS) with the commentary 
Pañcārthabhāṣỵa (PABh) by Kauṇḍinya (prob. 4th–6th 
century), and Haradaṭṭa’s Gaṇakārikā (GK) along with the 
commentary called Ratnaṭīkā (RṬ) attributed to Bhāsarva-
jña (prob. 8th and 10th centuries, respectively). Also rele-
vant are the Pāśupata ritual manuals recently discovered 
by Diwakar Acharya, such as the Saṃskārakārikā (Acharya 
2007), and other, non-Pāśupata sources that may have in-
corporated Pāśupata accounts, namely the early Siddhān-
tatantras Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā and Mataṅgapārameśvara 
(Sanderson 2006: 156; Kafle 2020; Acri 2014), as well as the 
Atharvavedapariśiṣṭas (Bisschop and Griffiths 2003) and 
the (Ur-)Skandapurāṇa (Bakker 2014; Bisschop 2006).these various practices of a Pāśupata ascetic’s life, 
enumerated in the PABh and other sources, can be 
seen depicted on reliefs of Khmer temples (Chem-
burkar and Kapoor 2018). 
According to the PABh, the pāśupatavrata 
commences with the ritual of the ash-bath (bhas-
masnāna). The text (1.1, p. 4) describes how Rudra 
himself, having incarnated as Lakulīśa in the body 
of a dead brahmin at Kārohaṇa in present-day 
Gujarat, stated the injunctions and marks of the 
Pāśupata order, and began living on an altar of 
ashes, in a pure spot defined as āyatana, in order to 
establish a connection with his first disciple, Kuśika. 
In 1.2 (p. 8), both the s ūtra and its commentary 
stress that the foremost vidhi for ascetic practice 
is that of bhasmasnāna, which must be performed 
three times a day, and that the ashes should be 
bright, pure, and should be obtained in a large 
quantity (see Hara 1966: 171–172). Supplemen-
tary bathing is required after any act like eating, 
spitting, etc. The injunction is to sleep on ash and 
nothing else (PABh ad 1.3, p. 9). The PABh (ad 1.2, 
p. 8) also mentions that the initiate is not allowed 
to make his own ashes or light a fire. The RṬ states that the ascetic must rub himself vigorously from the soles of his feet to the top of his head with the 
ash.
36 The ash should be of the purest quality37 and 
the Pāśupata should take a large quantity, because they are necessary for the accomplishment of his 
duties. In case a large quantity cannot be obtained, 
then a practitioner may take less. The container for 
carrying ashes is a well-known implement of the 
sect (Hara 1966: 172).
Mentions of ashes and ash-related practices are 
found in Khmer and Cam epigraphy. Inscription 
K. 733 (IC, I: 3–5), dated to 639 CE, of Phnom 
Preah Vihear talks about Vidyāpuṣpa, a Pāśupata 
ācārya who practised Pāśupata austerities. With a 
donation from a king, he established an āśrama 
for his coreligionists. This inscription speaks of 
Vidyāpuṣpa visiting a sacred place in a dream, 
where he saw the footprints of Śiva, a cow, and 
36. RṬ ad GK  7, p. 17; cf. Śivadharmottara 11.46ab.
37. RṬ ad GK 7, line 11 remarks that the ashes must be 
white (śukla). The 12th-century Tewar Inscription (line 9) of 
Gayākarṇa praise an ascetic named Bhāva Brahma because 
he sleeps on pure ashes (Indian Antiquary vol. XVIII: 211; 
cf. Pathak 1980: 16).
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   240 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 243] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples241
ashes (bhasman). The inscription of Glai Lomov 
(Bergaigne 1893, no. 393A, st. V) of King Indravar -
man I (801 CE) from the neighbouring kingdom 
of Campā mentions white ashes (sitabhasman), 
yoga, muttering, huṃkāra,38 and the ultimate goal 
of union with Rudra, in concurrence with the Pāśu-
pata regimen described in the PS (Bhattacharya 
1955: 481).  Another inscription, K. 853 at Phnom 
Bayan (IC, I: 258, st. VII) from Yaśovarman I’s 
reign (889–c.915), praises an ascetic named Am -
arbhāva,39 who is appointed as the head of the In-
drāśrama, and is gifted a pot of gold filled with 
ashes.40 This is significant, as it casts light on one 
of the central practices of the sect. K. 380 (IC, VI: 
264) from Phnom Preah Vihear in the reign of 
Sūryavarman I (r. 1002–1050) mentions bhasman. 
Though the inscription is too degraded to translate, 
Kamaleswar Bhattacharya (1961: 46, fn. 5) regard-
ed this inscription too as being associated with the 
Pāśupatas. 
The epigraphic references listed above clearly 
indicate the importance of ash-related practices 
in the Śaiva/Pāśupata religious landscape of the 
ancient Khmer domains over a period of nearly 
400 years. The inscriptional record also gives us 
glimpses of real-life practices by Pāśupata ascetics 
and hermitages relating to ash that are seldom if 
ever described in the Sanskrit transmitted literature 
from South Asia. For instance, some inscriptions 
differentiate between normal ash and pungent ash, 
possibly indicating their usage in different rituals—
the latter being used for cleaning the jaṭā or the 
38. Bergaigne 1893: 43–46; compare Bhattacharya 1955: 
481. This may be a variant or ‘development’ of the origi -
nal sound hu ḍukkāra or hudduṅkāram (also attested as 
duṃḍuṃ, huṃḍum, huḍu ṃ in the sources), the imitation 
of the bull’s cry made by touching the palate with the tip 
of the tongue (Kafle 2020: 255–256, fn. 443).
39. On the basis of his study of Śaiva cult in northern India, 
Pathak (1980: 19, fn. 2) argues that ascetics of Pramāṇa and 
Ananta gotras of the Pāśupata sect bore names beginning 
with Bhāva-, such as Bhāvavālmīki, Bhāvatejas, Bhāvodyo -
ta. Estève (2009: 476–480) and Goodall (2015: 26–27) also 
advance this view. According to Bhandarkar (1913: 120), 
names ending in -rāśi are Pāśupata and/or Kālamukha.
40. K. 853, st. VII (IC, I: 257): ‘In his gratitude, this king 
duly honoured the ascetic, with precious objects: ashes in 
a pot of gold, a rosary etc.’coil of hair worn by Śaiva ascetics as a chignon.41 
While comparing the āśramas founded by Yaśovar -
man I, viz. a Buddhist Saugatāśramas at Prasat Ong 
Mong, a Vaiṣṇavāśrama at Prasat Komnap, and a 
Brāhmaṇāśrama and a Māheśvarāśrama at Prasat 
Prei, Cœdès (1932: 103) points to the list of objects 
required in each āśrama. While the Śaivas required 
ashes, the Vaiṣṇavas required razors and scissors. 
Inscriptions at Yaśovarman I’s āśramas for Śaivas 
and Pāśupatas specifically direct that each initiate 
should be given, among other things, 
One āḍhaka of ash, one ā ḍhaka of pungent ash 
to clean the hair bun. All these objects will be 
given every 
four months individually to the 
brahmans (dvija), the senior teachers and as-
cetics (tapasvin). (ibid.: 102)42 
The term ā ḍhaka is a measure by weight of food 
grains; in the Khmer context, according to Claude 
Jacques, it would be equal to 5 kilograms.43 There-
fore each ascetic, brahmin, and senior teacher in 
the āśrama required 10 kilograms of ash every four 
months. Given the number of ascetics/brahmins/
senior teachers who must have resided at each 
āśrama and performed the ash rituals three times 
a day, along with the requirement for ash for sup-
plementary cleansing and sleeping, the amount of 
ash which each āśrama needed to generate and 
store would have been considerable.  
The requirement of ash mentioned in the 
Khmer inscriptions listed above in connection with 
populous Śaiva āśramas44 indicates the importance 
of, and adherence to, observances and rituals re -
41. K. 774 (IC, IV: 64); stele of Thnal Baray (K. 279D, st. 
IV–V, 9th century; Bergaigne 1893: 424, 430). 
42. Cœdès notes that as Yaśovarman I founded several 
āśramas, these inscriptions may have been meant to intro-
duce standardized regulations to earlier practices. 
43. Āḍhaka conversion differs from time to time and region 
to region; Claude Jacques calculated it as ca. 5 Kgs in the 
ancient Khmer context (email dated 19 June 2017).
44. An indication of the number of people inhabiting  
these āśramas is suggested by the number of slaves donated 
to them: see C, XCVIII in Cœdès 1932: 104–105. He com-
ments that in both the Vaiṣṇava and Buddhist āśramas  
there could be no less than fifty slaves; while the lines  
referring to the Brāhmaṇāśrama  have been obliterated, 
a similar amount of slaves must have been attached to 
that āśrama.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   241 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 244] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin242
quiring this resource, and raises the question of 
where, in a monsoonal country, such a ritual could 
take place, and where the agnyāgāra or ‘house of 
fire’ for the production of ashes (and, perhaps, the 
performance of homa rituals) was situated within 
āśramas and, possibly, temple complexes as well.45 
In the light of the above, we wonder whether the 
annex buildings discussed here could have pro -
vided suitable candidates for this role. In the lack 
of detailed and explicit data drawn from Khmer 
epigraphy and transmitted texts, we must turn to 
Sanskrit sources to find clues about the doctrinal 
and ritual background as well as the architectural 
context from which the annex buildings could have 
originated.
The Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa (henceforth: AVP) 
40 describes the duration, place, and methods in-
volved for observing the Pāśupata observance, in-
cluding bhasmasnāna at the end of the ‘offerings’ 
(i.e. dancing, singing, etc. while residing in a temple 
or āyatana: cf. PS 1.8 , 3.9–4.5). Verse 1.4  prescribes 
dancing, singing, etc. while residing in a temple for 
this observance:
athāsyāyatanāni
mahādevāyatane ’pāṃ samīpe
giriguhāyāṃ gavāṃ goṣṭhe ’gnyāgāre vā
Now the places of this [observance].
At a sanctuary of Mahādeva, in the vicinity of 
water,
In a mountain cave, in a cow-pen or in a fire-
house. (trans. Bisschop and Griffiths 2003: 326) 
The agnyāgāra for the observances of the pāśupa- 
tavrata has been loosely defined as a ‘fire-house’.46 
Bisschop and Griffiths (ibid., fn. 53 ), while pointing 
at the occurrence of the word in the Vedic corpus 
with various meanings, note that in the context of 
the passage in question ‘the precise meaning of the 
word is not clear’. Payne (2011 : 253, fn. 62 ) under-
stands the word agnyāgāra and its many synonyms 
45. For, indeed, the Pāśupata adept in the first stage of 
his ca
reer was prescribed to live in a temple ( āyatanavāsī ).
46. Dresden (1941: 151) describes agnyāgāra as a place for 
keeping the sacred fire. In Bhāradvājaśrautas ūtra 1.6.14, 
agnyāgāra is juxtaposed with āyatana (parisam ūhanty ag-
nyagārāṇy upalimpanty āyatanāni; cf. Kashikar 1964: 10). as a shrine devoted to homa rituals.47 Gonda (1969 : 
16) noted that in Vedic literature āyatana is ‘the 
place for keeping the three sacred fires’, as well as 
the ‘(receptacle of the) fire in which a dead body 
is to be cremated’, and to ‘the fire-place when it is 
removable or transportable’. Could the passage 
quoted above be referring to a fire-chamber asso-
ciated with a specific ritual function? 
In 2.1, the text describes the preparation of the 
āyatana and the ritual:
gocarmamātraṃ sthaṇ ḍilam upalipya gomaye- 
nollikhyābhyukṣyāgne prehīty agniṃ praṇīyo-
pasamādhāya paristīrya brahmāṇaṃ kalpayi- 
tvā nānyadevatādiśi rudrasya dakṣiṇodapātraṃ 
sthāpayitvā mahāvyāhṛtibhir agnyāyatane 
nidhāya rudram āvāhayati //
Having smeared a 
piece of ground of the size 
of a cow’s hide with cow-dung, having drawn 
[an auspicious sign] on it, having besprinkled 
it, having brought forth fire [with the mantra] 
‘agne prehi’, having added [fuel to it], having 
spread [grass] around [it], having prepared a 
brahmin (?), having placed a water-vessel to the 
right side of Rudra—not in any other deity’s di-rection—he invites Rudra, installing him in the 
fire-place with the Great Utterances. (trans. Bis-
schop and Griffiths 2003: 328–329)
Subsequently the adept, having invited Rudra in 
the fire, identifies him with that fire (2.7 ).48 He 
then kindles a sacred fire (for the preparation of 
the ashes) (3.3 ) and bathes in ashes (3.9 ). Verses 
3.4ff. contain a description and praise of bhas-
masnāna. These passages show that the agnyāgāra, 
besides hosting the fire-ritual, would have served 
for the performance of ash-related observances. 
The mention of the ‘right side of Rudra’ (rudrasya 
47. ‘Agni-niketana , -sad ana, -āgāra: the place at which one 
performs the ritual of fire. For grand occasions, temples 
have a hall especially reserved for the cult; but on ordinary 
days it is performed in the ardhama ṇḍapa , in a kuṇḍa 
permanently dug into the floor.’
48. yo agnau rudra ity anumantrayed āvāhane 
devadevasyāvāhayāmy aham iti  // ‘He should speak the 
mantra “ yo agnau rudraḥ ” [over the fire (cf. 40.2.1) / image 
(?)], at the Invitation of the God of gods, [adding the words] 
“I perform the invitation”’ (trans. Bisschop and Griffiths 
2003: 331).
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   242 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 245] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples243
dakṣiṇa°) in the context of the installation of the 
sacred fire and the performance of bhasmasnāna is 
notable as it mirrors the occurrence of the equiva-
lent word dakṣiṇām ūrti, the ‘right side of the Lord’, 
in similar contexts, which we will discuss below.
A passage in Chapter 11  of the Śivadharmottara 
(also found in the related text Śivadharma)—an 
early text that we have mentioned above with 
regard to the vidyāyatana, stemming from a milieu 
of lay Śaiva worship that has preserved Pāśupa -
ta-derived material—describes practices of adepts 
abiding in the Śaiva āśrama compound that are in 
harmony with those laid out in first-hand Pāśupata 
accounts. As such, it constitutes a mix between lay 
modes of worship and ascetic lifestyles. It mentions 
an agnyāgāra as one of the prescribed places to 
be built by the adept to carry out his observances: 
svāśramād uttare kuryāt  
puṣpārāmaṃ suśobhanam / 
agnyāgārakasaṃyuktam49  
aiśānyām īśvarālayam // 11.3 
prādeśasaṃbhave50 kuryāt  
yatra syāt saṃbhavo bhuvi /
śivād dakṣiṇataḥ kuryāt  
tadbhaktābhyāgatālayam51 // 11.4
[An adept of the śivāśrama] should make, to 
the north of his own residence, a beautiful flow-
er-garden, furnished with a fire-shed [in the 
southeast] and a temple of Śiva in the north-
eastern direction. 
If there is no space for it, he should make it 
wherever land is available. To the south (or: 
right side) of Śiva (śivād dakṣiṇataḥ) [i.e., the 
main temple, liṅga, or image], he should make 
a guesthouse for his devotees. 
That the agnyāgāraka or fire-shed was built in the 
southeast can be inferred from the context of the 
passage, mentioning the other directions, as well 
as other passages in the text. Chapter 2, which is 
devoted to the ritual of vidyādāna or ‘gift of knowl -
edge’ associated with the copying and worshiping 
49. Em.; agnyaṅgārakasaṃyuktam ŚDU; anyāgāra- 
samāyuktam ŚD.
50. ŚD; pr
ādeśasaṃbhave  ŚDU.
51. ŚD; ta
dbhaktānāṃ tathā balam  ŚDU.of Śaiva manuscripts, prescribes the building of a 
‘kitchen’ (mahānasa) in the southeast:
suvīthyāḥ purata ḥ kāryaṃ  
diśy āgneyy āṃ mah ānasam /
dhūmanirgamanopeta ṃ  
pūrvata ḥ satrama ṇḍapam // 2.131 
In front of a nicely built terrace, in the Agni di-
rection (Southeast), a kitchen endowed with a 
chimney has to be built; in the East, a pillared 
pavilion for the sattra
. (trans. De Simini 2016: 
386)
Thus, while the Śivadharmottara does not explic -
itly identify the ‘library’ or vidyālaya mentioned 
earlier in Chapter 2 with any of the ancillary build-
ings listed in this account,52 it mentions a kitchen 
or fireplace-building endowed with ‘issues/exits/
outlets for the smoke’ (dh ūmranirgamaṇa) in the 
southeast.
A list of (annex) buildings (śālā) with similar 
functions is mentioned in later Śaiva Saiddhānti -
ka treatises on temple architecture, each linked to 
cardinal and intermediary points of the compass 
(see, e.g., Ajitāgama, Kriyāpāda 38.43 ff., Dagens 
1977 : 112–113 ). In these sources, too, the kitchen 
(pacanasthāna) is usually located in the southeast, 
or east of the enclosure. On the other hand, some 
texts, like the Rauravāgama (Kriyāpāda 26.32 , 
Dagens and Barazer-Billoret 2000 : 130), mention 
a chapel for oblations (homakuṭi, homasthānā, ya-
jñālaya, yāgaśālā, yāgasthāna, cf. Colas 1986 : 274); 
while the ca. 8th-century Marīcisaṃhitā (11.3.2 , 
Colas 1986 : 143) locates it in the southeast, the 
Āgamas place it in the northeast (Dagens 1977 : 88). 
Furthermore, a vidyāsthāna (‘place for knowledge’) 
is mentioned in Ajitāgama, Kriyāpāda 38.47 , but 
in the direction marudvaruṇa (between northwest 
and west?). De Simini (2016 : 177) regards these 
vidyāsthānas as ‘places specifically meant for teach-
52. The buildings prescribed for the other directions are 
a ‘greenhouse of fragrant flowers, provided with cloths’ 
(gandhapu ṣpagṛhaṃ… pa ṭṭasaṃyutam , no rtheast), a 
treasury-house ( bhāṇḍāgāraṃ, north
), a storeroom 
(koṣṭhāgāraṃ, north
west), a pond (west), a deposit for 
fuel and kuśa  grass as well as weapons in the southwest: 
cf. Śivadharmottara  2.132–133. 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   243 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 246] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin244
ing activities’.53 Uttarak āmika 67.2 gives details on 
the vidyāsthāna, to be placed either in the main 
or intermediary directions, but without specifying 
where (ibid.: 341). Thus, the direction allotted in 
relatively late Saiddhāntika sources for this type of 
‘library’ building does not seem to match well with 
the Khmer archaeological evidence of the annex 
buildings;54 on the contrary, buildings associated 
with fire, such as kitchens, are usually placed in the 
southeastern quadrants of temples or āśramas in 
early sources like the Śivadharmottara, and also in 
some later Saiddhāntika scriptures.
Let us now go back to Chapter 11 of the 
Śivadharmottara, prescribing the acts of worship 
in the śivāśrama by the adept. The text explains that 
one who has taken up residence in the Śiva-temple 
(śivagṛhāśramin) should worship the Lord at the 
three junctures of the day, constantly [perform] 
the kindling of the [sacred] fire (trisandhyam 
arcayed īśam agnikāryañ ca śaktitaḥ,  v. 5ab), and 
also be devoted to the worship of the image of 
Śiva and [his] fire (śivārcāgniparo bhavet,  v. 16). 
He should perform worship at the three ‘baths’ 
(trisnānap ūjā, v. 21)—the ash-bath to be taken at 
the three sandhyās, mirroring the prescriptions 
found in such Pāśupata sources as the PS/PBh and 
GK/RṬ.  An eulogy of thrice-daily bhasmasnāna  
is presented in verses 44– 54. It lists the manifold 
fruits bestowed by this practice, which is superior 
to other baths in water, and calls the ash-bath an 
53. A 13th-century inscription from the Naṭarāja temple 
at Chidambaram describes the activity of a library (sar-
asvatībhaṇ ḍāra) situated in the northwestern part of the 
second enclosure of the temple, in the western maṇ ḍapa 
located to the north of the Subrahma ṇya shrine (Sanka -
ranarayanan 1993: 28ff.). This building included a vikra-
maśolaṉtirukkaiyo ṭṭi or ‘storeroom of sacred manuscripts’ 
entitled to King Vikrama Cōḻa (1118–1135 CE), and was an
-
imated by staff members conducting activities of reading 
and copying of texts. This is not only in harmony with the 
descriptions of the prerogatives of vidyāsthāna s mentioned 
in Śaiva texts, but also with the prescription given by the 
Ajitāgama with regard to its location, i.e. to the northwest 
of the main temple.
54. With the exception of the prescription in the architec-
tural section of the early Saiddhāntika text Sarvajñānottara  
19: 30c–32 that ‘A shrine to the East and South of one’s settle -
ment should face west’ (Goodall 2017: 74); this matches with 
the direction of the doors of the Khmer ‘annex buildings’ 
with respect to the main sanctuary.āgneya-bath, a bath ‘belonging or relating or con-
secrated to fire or its deity Agni’ (āgneya being 
also the southeastern direction).55 As per the prac-
tice of lay persons, he should make a tripuṇ ḍra-
mark with ashes on the forehead with ‘white 
ashes’, while the yogin should take a full bath (vv. 
45–46). Verse 48 explains that ashes obtained from 
a Śivāgni (sacred fire of Śiva) are pure (pavitra).56 
Verses 49– 54 extol the qualities and superiorities 
of the ash-bath, which leads to unity with Rudra. 
Along similar lines, a passage of the same text (ch. 
5.195– 197, shared also by the Śivadharma) lists the 
benefit of performing the fire-oblation (agnikārya) 
and erecting a building in bricks (iṣṭakāgāra) for 
Rudrāgni, which leads to the obtainment of unity 
with Rudra (rudrasāyujyam) through said ritual, while the ash bath leads to purification from the 
ten sins.
57
The above passages highlight the importance of 
the ash-bath and the connections existing between 
that observance and the sacred fire established in 
the place of worship, possibly in the kitchen or fire-
shed located in the southeast. Another—more am -
biguous, yet early—reference to a Pāśupata ritual 
involving fire may be found in the Mattavilāsa, a 
farce composed in Kāñcī in the 7 th century. The 
character of the ‘madman’ (unmattaka), which 
Ferstl (2015) has proposed to identify with some 
kind of Pāśupata ascetic (unmattavrata being 
performed by the Lākula subgroup)—probably a 
sādhaka, as opposed to his ācārya, Babhrukalpa:
The unmattaka walks towards his ācārya and 
offers the skull bowl he has found. Babhrukalpa, 
55. Cf. AVP 40, 4.5, distinguishing it from the vāruṇa and 
saumya types, on which see Bisschop and Griffiths 2003: 336, 
fn. 109; cf. Padoux et al. 2000: 173–174, s.v. āgneyasnāna.
56. Svataś śuddhakulāgāvaḥ saṃbh ūtantā sugomayam / 
śivāgninā punaḥ paktaṃ pavitraṃ bhasma tat smṛtam // 
11.48. 
57. śivāhutyā [śivaṃ stutvā ŚD] jagatsarvaṃ sṛṣṭi-
dvāreṇa [
vṛṣṭidvāreṇa ŚD] dhāryate / yat saṃdhāya 
jagatpuṇyaṃ agnikāryeṇa tad bhavet // 5.195 yaḥ kuryād 
iṣṭakāgāraṃ rudrāgner atiśobhinam [atiśobhanam ŚD] /  
sakṛt tatrāgnikāryeṇa rudrasāyujyam āpnuyāt // 5.196 
śivāgnikāryaṃ yaḥ kṛtvā [kuryāt ŚD] triyāyuṣam ihāt-
manaḥ [kuryād āyuṣyam ātmanaḥ ŚD] / mucyate daśabhiḥ 
[pṛthubhiḥ ŚD] pāpaiḥ śivena [sitena ŚD] sitabhasmanā 
[śivabhasmanā ŚD] // 5.197.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   244 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 247] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples245
however, refuses to accept it and sets off to 
perform an obscure ritual called the ‘hour of 
smoke’ (dh ūmavelā). This might refer to a cer-
tain ritual for the preparation of ashes, a most 
important requirement for 
Pāśupata rituals. I 
am, however, not aware of an exact record for 
the ‘hour of smoke of the Venerable residing in the eastern region’, as it is called in the MVP. 
(ibid.: 14)
To explain this idea, Ferstl refers to the prescrip -
tion concerning the preparation of ashes in AVP 
2.1 (Bisschop and Griffiths 2003: 328ff; cf. supra). 
It is possible that the ‘Venerable residing in the 
eastern region’ (bhagavata ḥ pūrvasthal īnivāsinaḥ) 
stands for the Sun (Lockwood and Bhat 1995 : 79, 
fn. 49), indicating that this ritual was enacted at the 
sandhyās, towards Śiva-Rudra conceived or mani-
fested as the Sun. A passage adumbrating just such 
ritual for the preparation of ashes for the morning 
sandhyā worship may be RṬ on GK 1.7  (p. 28 ):
tatra p ūrvasaṃdhyayoḥ śaucaṃ kṛtvā bhasma 
saṃskartavyam // kartṛkārakādidoṣara- 
hitaṃ śuklādiguṇayuktaṃ ca bhasmārjitaṃ 
śivadakṣiṇam ūrtau mantraiḥ saṃskṛtya 
pradakṣiṇaṃ ca dattvā s ūryarūpiṇaṃ bhaga-
vantaṃ locanatrayeṇa prasannadṛṣṭyā bhasma 
paśyantaṃ dhyāyet // 
In the first two [sections] of this period [that is, 
the two hours before sunrise] he should cleanse 
himself and prepare the ashes. The ashes which he obtains should be free from any impurity 
of agent or other factor in their making and 
should possess such qualities as whiteness, etc. 
He should sanctify these ashes to Śiva of the 
southern image by prayers and after circum-
ambulating the image should meditate on the 
Blessed One in the form of the sun, who looks 
at the 
ashes with kindly glance from his three 
eyes. (trans. Hara 1966: 548)
Ferstl wonders whether the word dhūmavel ā in the 
clause bhagavata pūrvasthal īnivāsino dhūmavel ā, 
pratip ālayāmi ‘I’ll observe the “hour of smoke” for 
the Venerable residing in the eastern region’ (Mat-
tavilāsaprahasana, p. 60 , 1f.), may be ‘a corruption 
of dhūm( r)avedy ām (cf. bhasmavedy ām uṣitaḥ in 
PABh, p. 4
,4)’, which would imply some kind of 
ritual activity of the homa type. But he points out that ‘Any activity with fire, however, is forbidden 
in order to observe the general commandment 
(yama) of non-injury (ahiṃs ā) (cf. PABh, p. 17 , 
lines 7–8)’. However, textual evidence from South 
and Southeast Asia suggests that some Pāśupatas 
(or, rather, the post-Pāñcārthika developments/
subgroups that arose within the Atimārga move-
ment in the early mediaeval period) might have 
actually performed fire rituals. Compare, for 
instance, Śivadharmottara Ch. 11  vv. 16 –18, de-
scribing a Śaiva hermit—in strikingly Pāśupata 
terms—as entirely devoted to the fire of the Śaiva 
worship (siv ārcāgniparo), constantly engaging in 
meditation of Śiva (śivadhy ānarata ḥ sadā), de -
pending on ashes (bhasmani ṣṭho), having as abode 
the liṅga/the hermitage of Śiva (text edition as in 
De Simini 2016 : 51, fn. 148 ); and Ni śvāsaguhya  
9.8cd, referring to a P āśupata or Lākula practi -
tioner as follows:  
japahomarato nityam  
pratigrahavivarjjitaḥ /
triṣkālam arcayed deva ṃ  
triṣkālasnānam ācaret //
Constantly devoted to muttering and fire-ritual, 
not accepting any gifts, one should worship God 
three times [a day]; one should carry out [ash-]
bathing during the three times [of the day].
 
The above material would seem to reflect an evo-
lution of Pāśupatism from a fireless ascetic move-
ment to one admitting homa rituals. An anal -
ogous stance is reflected in the characterization 
of Atimārga from the perspective of (a localized 
form of) Mantramārgic Saiddhāntika Śaivism in 
the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Śaiva text Bhuvanakośa, 
preserved on Bali. Dyads 25 –30 of Chapter 8 refers 
to sakala (‘material, visible’) practices, which are 
inferior to the gnosis-oriented niṣkala (‘immaterial, 
invisible’) ones of the (Śaiva)siddhāntajñāna, as a 
mixture of homa ritualism with typically Pāśupata 
modes of worship, like ashes (homabhasma 8.25; 
homabhasmavidhāna 8.28c), mantras, salutations 
(namaskāra), hūṃdhr ūtkāra,58 etc. As suggested by 
the use of such technical terminology, the passage 
58. This is probably a variant form or local development 
(attested multiple times as such in the text) of hu ḍḍukkāra ; 
see supra, fn. 38.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   245 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 248] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin246
may reflect a localized evolution of Pāśupata 
Śaivism along ritualistic lines, which is consistent 
with a trend documented across the wider Indic 
world.
The textual passages discussed above confirm 
the importance of ashes and fire-rituals in early 
Śaiva contexts, and suggest the connection of ashes 
with a place (āyatana, fireplace-house, or kitchen) 
in the southeast or south of the image/main temple 
to carry out observances and rituals. These de -
scriptions are compatible with the interpretation 
of Khmer annex buildings as fire shrines, and we 
surmise that Pāśupata Śaivism must have played a 
role in setting the doctrinal and ritual background 
for the establishment and functioning of these edi-
fices across the ages in the Khmer domains. Indeed, 
the conservative nature of Khmer Śaivism has been 
noted by scholars (see, e.g., Sanderson 2001 : 22–23, 
fn. 28). It is therefore possible that the Atimārga 
developed independently in the Khmer domains 
and remained influential, and representative, in the 
Śaiva paradigm throughout the Angkorian period, 
that is well after the movement lost its prominence 
over large areas of the Indian subcontinent. 
pāśupata initiation rituals, the ‘giFT 
of knowledge’, and śiva dakṣiṇāmūrti
As we have mentioned above, ash plays a crucial 
role in the Pāśupata ascetic regimen. It is not only 
essential for purification, but it also constitutes a 
prime ingredient in the Pāśupata initiation ritual 
(dīkṣā), when the teacher transforms his disci -
ple using ashes empowered with Sadyojāta and 
other mantras. The ācārya is an integral part of 
the initiation ritual and Pāśupata texts accord 
the greatest importance to his role. Śiva imparts 
knowledge through the ācārya and by the act of 
offering service, the disciple receives the vidyā or 
knowledge (or: ‘book’) from him.59 Some of these 
interactions—such as rubbing oil, cleaning the 
guru’s feet, etc.—between a Pāśupata ācārya and 
his disciples are carved on the Mỹ Sơn E1 pedestal 
from Campā, Vietnam (Fig. 7.13 ; see Chembur-
kar and Kapoor 2018 ). Here we see an image of a 
59. We will elaborate on vidyā as ‘book’ below.bearded ācārya wearing a yogapaṭṭa (cloth medi-
tation band) across his knees and another instruct-
ing a practitioner who touches his guru’s feet. The 
transmission of the religious knowledge  depends 
on a strong personal link between the ācārya and 
practitioner and is crucial for the propagation 
of the tradition. The ācārya provides spiritual 
support and sustenance along with doctrinal and 
yogic instruction. It is the ācārya who creates a 
spiritual environment or āyatana for the disciple 
to practise: in PABh 1.1 (p. 4 ), the āyatana was the 
place established by Lakulīśa to ‘initiate’ his first 
disciple, Kuśika, into the system:
Having assumed the marks of the transcendent 
stage of life he delivered his teaching. From the 
words ‘bathing and lying in ashes, supplemen-
tary bath, wearing flowers taken from an im-
age and wearing a single cloth’ [PS. 1.2–5 and 
10], We may infer that he dwelt on an altar 
of ashes in a place pure for the reception of 
pupils, at a temple as in his scripture is set 
forth in order to make the location clear. And 
then, the blessed Kuśika came to this teacher 
and seeing in him the marks of excellence such 
as perfect contentment and in himself just the 
opposite, he clasped the teacher’s feet60 and 
declared in accordance with rule his caste, his 
family-name, his education and his freedom 
from debt.61 (trans. Hara 1966: 157–158)
Thus, the āyatana in origin was thought of as a 
pure place to reside (PS 1.7 : āyatanav āsī; PABh, 
p. 12), receive pupils,62 and conduct rituals. This 
āyatana, initially understood as a sacred space 
where a disciple receives the transmission of the 
60. This passage may provide the context for identifying the 
relief on the Cam pedestal depicted in Fig. 7.13 as sādhaka 
and his prospective ācārya ‘reenacting’ an all-important 
moment in the history of the tradition, namely Kuśika 
coming to Lakulīśa, representing the former clasping the 
feet of the latter. 
61. atyāśramaprasiddhaṃ liṅgam āsthāya pravacanam 
uktavān bhasmasnānaśayanānusnānanirmālyaikavāsogra -
haṇād adhikaraṇaprasiddhyarthaṃ ca svaśāstrokte āyatane 
śiṣyasambandhārthaṃ śucau deśe bhasmavedyāmuṣitaḥ //.
62. Compare with the placement ‘at the right side of Śiva’ 
of a guesthouse for the reception of devotees (tadbhak-
tābhyāgatālayam) in Śivadharmottara 11.4, quoted above.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   246 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 249] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples247
tradition from Śiva through the lineage of a guru,63 
may also have had a function in the ritual of ini-
tiation into the Pāśupata order. While keeping in 
mind the textual passages discussed above, we will 
explore more below.
In stanza 5 of the GK we find a listing of the 
items constituting the last of the five categories 
of the Pāśupata system: ‘The material adjunct, the 
proper time, the proper ritual, the image of god 
and verily the master’. The commentary on the last 
three items runs as follows:
By the proper ritual (kriyā) is meant the ritu-
al of initiation pertaining to the image of God 
(kāraṇa) and to the pupil. The Order of this ritu-
al is to be understood from the Saṃskārakārikā.  
By image (m ūrti) is meant a spot of ground to 
the south of, and not separated by the ascet-
ics’ hut etc., from the seat of worship of God 
63. It has been argued that the term gurvāyatana attested 
in Sanskrit inscriptions from the subcontinent has been 
variously interpreted as a sacred space where a disciple 
receives the transmission of the tradition, or as a temple 
dedicated to the liṅgas of deceased Pāśupata masters. The 
Mathurā Pillar Inscription of Candragupta II mentions the 
installation of two liṅgas by Uditācārya for his teachers in 
the gurvāyatana  (Bhandarkar 1931: 4). However, Sircar (1942: 
271) argues that the teacher’s shrine was not a memorial 
but a place for the living teachers (for a recent discussion, 
see Lefèvre 2011: 48–49). The remnants of such ash-related 
practices may still be seen in the Śaiva landscape of the holy 
town of Rishikesh in northern India. At the Someśvara 
temple, in the southeastern section, is the space for the priest 
and ascetics to honour their guru, with a log of white wood 
kept burning in front of the guru’s photograph, which also 
provides the ashes for the Śaiva ascetics. (mahādeva), which should be [an image] char-
acterized by erect phallus, etc. as described in 
the sūtras on presentation (upahāras ūtra). By 
master is meant teacher […].64 (trans. Hara 
1966: 501–502)
The passage identifies the m ūrti in the kārikā as 
referring to a spot on the ground in which the 
initiation should be carried out, at the south of 
the image of Lakulīśa. The initiation involves the 
substances (dravya) of ashes, produced from the 
sacred fire. This passage recalls the preparation 
of an āyatana by Lakulīśa, Śiva’s incarnation, in-
itiating Kuśika in PABh 1.1 , as if to ‘repeat’ that 
important moment in the mythical history of the 
movement.  The text mentions the Saṃskārakārikā, 
a ritual manual of the Pāśupatas. This source elab-
orates on the practice mentioned in the RṬ in a 
more detailed manner:
[Answer:] The [appropriate] time [of the trans-
formatory rite] is the morning, and the [appro-
priate] place is [a place] where the southern 
face [of the image (i.e. liṅga) located]. Materials 
required are the ku śa-grass and so on, and the 
mantras [commended for the rite] are Sadyo 
[-
jāta] and the other brahmamantras. (4) 
64. kālaḥ p ūrvāhṇaḥ // kāraṇam ūrtiśi ṣyayoḥ saṃskārakar -
ma kriyety ucyate //  tatkramaś ca saṃskārakārikāyāṃ 
draṣṭavyaḥ // mūrtiśa bdena yad upahāras ūtre mahā de-
vejyāsthānam ūrdhv aliṅgādilakṣaṇaṃ vyākhyātaṃ 
tatsamīpadakṣiṇabh ūprade
śaḥ kuṭyādyavyavahito ’trā-  
bhipretaḥ //  gurur ācāryaḥ […].
Fig. 7.13: Mỹ Sơn E1 Pedestal relief depicting a disciple attending to his guru. (Photo: Trần Kỳ Phương )
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   247 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 250] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin248
  The teacher is the agent of the transform-
atory rite; the cause is God. […] (5
)65 (trans. 
Acharya 2007 : 37).
The disciple is instructed to bring the sacred ashes 
and sanctified water-jars (41 ), which should be 
sanctified by a teacher who has good qualities and 
is bathed in ash (43 –45). Then the teacher, med-
itating on Lakulīśa, and cognizant of the way of 
union with Śiva, should perform ritual acts and 
offerings to the bodies of God, then bathe the God 
first in ashes and then in pure water (58 –61ab). 
This brings about the commencement of union 
with Śiva (62 cd–63 ab). The second phase of the 
ritual is described in vv. 81 –84 (quoted in full infra, 
p. 251). The adept, whose members are besmeared 
with ashes, and who is meditating on Śiva’s da -
kṣiṇām ūrti, undergoes the imposition of the hands 
on his head by the ācārya ( śivahasta).
There are several interesting elements in this 
passage, which merit a detailed discussion. We 
would like to start by from the concept of da -
kṣiṇām ūrti, already mentioned in many of the 
sources describing the places for the Pāśupata 
observance and/or initiation quoted above. As 
Pāśupata texts prescribe that the initiate should 
consecrate the ashes with mantras in the vicin -
ity of the dakṣiṇām ūrti,66 literally ‘the southern/
rightward image/body/figure’, Hans Bakker (2001 ) 
argues that the initiation site of a practitioner is 
at the m ūrti, a consecrated place on the right side 
(dakṣiṇa, or south side) of the manifestation of the 
supreme God or Mahādeva. On the basis of his 
readings of Kauṇḍinya’s PABh and other sources, 
Bakker (2004 : 127) argues that the term m ūrti in 
the Pāśupata context refers to the bodily manifes-tation as well as to the place of the image:
The concept of daksiṇām ūrti thus comprises the 
manifested form (r ūpa) of God, the (physical) 
image or 
body (m ūrti) in which it 
may be envis-
aged and the right side (daksiṇe parśve), which 
65. [kālaḥ ] (pr ātas tath ā deśo yatra) mūrtis tu da kṣiṇā / 
upa
karaṇaṃ darbhādyaṃ mantrāḥ sadyādayaḥ smṛtāḥ // 
4 saṃsk ārakart ā ācāryo nimittaṃ kāraṇaṃ smṛtam […]  
// 5 (ed. Acharya 2007: 29).
66. PABh 1.1 (p. 8), 1.9 (pp. 14–15); RṬ 7 (pp. 17–18); cf. 
Bakker 2004: 128.indicates the Pāśupata’s position with respect to 
Mahādeva [Supreme] and his embodiment. 
According to Bakker, this would be applicable 
‘to every situation when the Pāśupata practition -
er enters into contact with his object of worship. ’ 
Therefore, the ācārya  would constantly personify 
Śiva for the initiate during the initiation rite, in 
which the place of the physical image, i.e., the 
mūrti, may be taken by the guru who represents 
Śiva (ibid .)
Bakker (ibid.: 128) further points to a possi-
ble confusion regarding the word, which in the 
course of the centuries became reinterpreted as the 
southern face or form of Śiva, especially in South 
India: ‘Temple southern walls were suitable for 
showing his role as teacher and tradition become 
reoriented and his right side became its southern 
face’ (ibid.: 129). He (ibid.: 133) then discusses a 
lintel that originally may have been placed at the 
entrance of a Pāśupata temple found in Nāgārī 
(Rajasthan) depicting a scene from Dakṣa’s sacri-
fice, where Mahādeva instructs Dakṣa on the Pāśu-
patayoga. Mahādeva (facing east) leans towards the 
right, casting a sidelong glance 45  degrees south 
towards Dakṣa, who is facing north. It seems to us 
that this arrangement could reflect the position of the adept who receives initiation from Mah
ādeva 
(dakṣiṇāyāṃ m ūrtau), ‘and by analogy the position 
of the student and the teacher, which replicates 
the one prescribed for teacher and pupil in some 
branches of Vedic literature’ (De Simini 2016 : 56, 
fn. 163), namely the southeast, or āgneya, direc -
tion, where the Cambodian annex-buildings are 
usually located with respect to the main temple. 
Furthermore, in Sanskrit texts, whether the da-
kṣiṇām ūrti represents a liṅga, a temple, the guru, 
or an actual image, the disciple should approach it 
facing north while standing at God’s right side, and 
thereby seeing the southern face of the ācārya, liṅga, 
or image (Bakker 2004 ). It is perhaps significant 
that the fire-ritual section of the Saiddhāntika text 
Somaśambhupaddhati prescribes that the adept 
should seat himself facing north with the centre 
of the fire-pit (kuṇ ḍa) in front of him to perform 
the homa in the fire-house (agnyāgāra).67 Does this 
67. Somaśambhupaddhati, section 4: ‘1. And now, after 
having obtained the permission of the master, he makes 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   248 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 251] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples249
injunction reflect the continuation of an originally 
Pāśupata practice?
It must be noted that some scholars have pro-
posed to interpret some of the images at Ellora 
and Elephanta, previously identified as Yogīśvara 
or Lakulīśa (Collins 1982 : 612), as Dakṣiṇāmūrti 
(Mankodi 1988 ); and that architectural sections 
found in some Southern Indian Saiddhāntika 
treatises locate icons of either Dakṣiṇāmūrti or 
Lakulīśa in the southern quadrant of Śaiva temples 
(e.g. Rauravāgama,  Kriyāpāda, 39.33 –35; Ajitāga-
ma, Kriyāpāda 14.75 ; see Dagens 1977 : 106). 
Clearly, an iconographical and symbolical connec -
tion between these three manifestations of Śiva can 
be established. Lakulīśa represents the prototypi-
cal initiator, or ascetic Śiva Yogīśvara. The South 
Indian Dakṣiṇāmūrti carries the book, symboliz-
ing the (Śaiva) knowledge and its transmission. In 
fact, devotion towards Lakul īśvara is relevant in 
the Śivadharmottara, ‘which gives prescriptions 
for the installation of the icon of the god precisely 
in the context of the gift of knowledge’ (De Simini 
2016 : 52).68 A tentative yet fascinating link between 
early Śaiva initiation and the bestowal of knowl-
edge as a book from a master to a disciple could 
thus be proposed. De Simini (ibid.: 319, fn. 792 ) 
elaborates on the hypothesis by Diwakar Acharya 
that pre-tantric (i.e. Pāśupata/Atimārga) initiation 
may have involved the donation of a manuscript. 
The Saṃskāravidhi in st. 54  seems to make a brief 
reference to the veneration of the manuscript of
 
his return to the residence of Agni, and circumambulates 
in silence, with all the utensils of the cult, and carrying in 
his hands a vase of arghya. 2. Then, looking upon all of 
the materials of the sacrifice with a divine gaze, he seats 
himself facing north, the center of the kuṇḍa in front of 
himself’. (trans. Payne [2011: 239] of the French translation 
by Brunner [Brunner-Lachaux 1963]).
68. Śivadharmottara 2.146–147: ‘There, according to rule, 
one should install Śiva, made of clay, wood or stone, who 
is the author of all treatises, omniscient, Lord who bears 
a club, (146) / Surrounded by pupils and pupils of pupils, 
with his hands raised in the act of teaching, seated in the 
lotus position, lord of the gods, a master whose speech is 
vivid (147)’; tatra m ṛddāruśailam v ā sthāpayed vidhivac 
chivam / sarvavidy āvidh ātāraṃ sarvajña ṃ lakul īśvaram 
// 146 v ṛtaṃ śiṣyapra śiṣyaiś ca vy ākhyānodyatap āṇikam / 
padm āsanastha ṃ deve śaṃ prasannavadana ṃ gurum // 147 
(text and translation De Simini 2016: 52).the Pañc ārthavidy ā, a term possibly denoting the 
Pāśupatasūtra (see Acharya 2007 : 42–43, fn. 95 ) . 
Śiva imparts knowledge through the ācārya and 
the disciple receives the vidyā or knowledge (or: 
‘book’) from him.69 We have already mentioned 
above depictions of Pāśupata ascetics carrying a 
manuscript on Khmer and Cam temple reliefs. 
The Śivadharmottara (Chapter 2 ) associates the 
ritualized transcription and ‘offering’ of the man-
uscript with the Śaiva knowledge with worship 
for Śivāgni and the teacher,70 and also prescribes 
the installation of that manuscript ‘in a cleansed, 
pleasant place in the presence of Śiva’ (or, ‘in front 
of Śiva’, śivasya purataḥ), to be worshiped ‘with 
the [same] devotion addressed to a teacher’.71 Is 
it possible that vidyādāna evolved from an origi-
nally a Pāśupata ritual connected with initiation, 
involving a ritual fire? 
Having considered the practice of the donation 
of a manuscript by the ācārya to the disciple, De 
Simini (2016 : 319, fn. 792 ) discusses the opposite 
scenario, and draws attention to the fact that the 
Ante ṣṭividhi 
mentions a manuscript among the possessions 
of a sādhaka initiate that, 
at his death, must 
be donated to the ācārya who performed 
the 
funerary rite: ‘Pavitra, manuscript, disciple, 
69. The word pañcārthavidyā, and his synonym pañcar -
thajñāna , refer to both the ‘knowledge of the five categories’ 
(i.e, the Pāñcārthika Pāśupata system) and the ‘treatise about 
the five categories’, namely the PS.
70. ‘Once [the transcription] is completed, he should again 
perform worship, according to the former procedure, for 
Śivāgni, the teacher, and knowledge, having fasted with 
effort’ (42), sampūr ṇe pūrvavidhin ā puna ḥ pūjāṃ prakalpa-
yet / śivāgniguruvidy ānāṃ sopav āsaḥ prayatnav ān // (trans. 
and text as in De Simini 2016: 378, 395). Compare v. 14: 
‘Having worshipped Śiva according to rule, one should 
then worship his knowledge, and [worship] with devotion 
the teacher as if he were Śiva, because this triad is similar’, 
śivaṃ sampūjya vidhivat tadvidy āṃ pūjayet tata ḥ / guru ṃ 
ca śivavad bhakty ā tulyam etat traya ṃ yata ḥ // (ibid.: 375, 
393). 
71. Verse 60, ‘Having gently placed it in a cleansed, pleas-
ant place in the presence of Śiva, having bowed to this [man -
uscript] with the [same] devotion addressed to a teacher, he 
should make offerings’, sthāne susa ṃskṛte ramye śivasya 
purata ḥ śanai ḥ / sth āpayitv ā guror bhakty ā taṃ praṇamya 
nivedayet // (De Simini 2016: 380, 397).
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   249 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 252] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin250
and whatever [possessions] may be there, such 
as a staff, should be handed over successively 
to the teacher who has helped [the deceased] to be [united] with the Lord’; pavitra
ṃ pus-
taka ṃ śiṣyaṃ kiñcid da ṇḍādika ṃ kram āt / tad  
ācāryāya d ātavya ṃ san āthaṃ yena kalpitam   
// 44. 
If the Khmer Annex buildings were (or, rather, 
became over time) libraries of some sort, could 
they have served the function of gurvāyatanas, i.e. 
temples associated with teachers and sacred fires, 
which also functioned as ‘resting places’ for the 
books (pustakāśrama) donated in this manner? 
De Simini (ibid.: 146) notes that Chapter 11  of the 
Śivadharmottara and the inscriptional records 
reflect a situation in which a manuscript collection 
attached to an āśrama is formed by private dona-
tions, and that such ‘places intended for the storage 
of manuscripts might also have hosted the practice 
of ritual activities focused on the manuscripts.’ She 
refers to Buddhist examples from Northwestern 
India and Tibet discussed by Fussman, i.e. an 
isolated chapel or hermitage building detached 
from the main monastery, where ‘only a hermitic 
teacher ( ācārya), part of 
a lineage of ācāryas offi-
ciating rituals for the laypeople, could have lived before it was abandoned for good’, and which could 
have stored the manuscripts (ibid.: 147). The Śaiva 
tradition could have shared similar concerns for 
properties (including manuscripts) of the deceased 
teachers and adepts. 
The evidence analysed thus far would seem to 
establish a connection between a place at the right 
of the image (i.e. south, possibly southeast), be -
stowal of instruction (book(s), Śaiva knowledge) 
and fire (for homa and initiation, and perhaps also 
the production of ashes) in an early Śaiva context. 
This leads us to ask whether the Śiva dakṣiṇām ūrti 
pediment on the annex building (Type B) placed 
in the southeastern corner of the first enclosure of 
Banteay Srei hints at the above Pāśupata tradition 
(Fig. 7.14).72 Here Śiva as a guru is on the right side 
of the supreme god of the main sanctuary. Did the 
annex buildings represent an evolution, in terms 
of architecture, doctrine, and praxis, of an original 
(gurv)āyātana space where initiation rituals took 
place? 
72. All the pediments on the southeastern annex building 
depict Śaiva themes, clearly indicating its Śaiva association, 
whereas the northwestern annex building bears reliefs of 
Kṛṣṇa, indicating a Vaiṣṇava association.
Fig. 7.14: 11th-century Banteay Srei annex building in the southeastern corner of the first enclosure of the temple 
housing a Śiva dakṣiṇām ūrti pe
diment on its entrance that faces the main sanctuary. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   250 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 253] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples251
sacred fire and significance of the 
ācārya
The association between initiation- and/or ho-
ma-rituals, a sacred fire, and an ācārya (conceived 
of as an embodiment of Śiva) that existed in early 
Śaivism in the Indian subcontinent may have been 
current also among the Khmers, and could have 
developed into a ‘regional’ tradition that led to the 
creation of annex buildings in several Khmer Śaiva 
temples. The majority of early Khmer images of 
Śiva either depict him as a teacher, or as an ascetic. 
Furthermore, one notes an association between 
Śiva and fire (agni), and between the ācārya and 
agni in the context of initiation, which stems from 
the Indian tradition. Paśupati, one of the eight 
names of Śiva, is regarded as one of the names 
representing fire by the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa 
(1.7.3.8), and the God of fire Agni and the master 
are seen as homologous in that text (Bakker 2004: 
118–119). Similarly, in the Vāyu Purāṇa (27.53) 
the body of Paśupati is said to be Fire (paśupater 
[…] tanur agnir), while the Brahmāṇ ḍa Purāṇa 
(1,10 .45cd–48 ab) states: 
The fifth name of yours that had been men-
tioned by me is Paśupati. Let this agni be the 
fifth body of your fifth name. On this being 
mentioned, the fiery brilliance that had been 
stationed in his body and is termed uṣṇa (hot) 
entered the fire. Hence it (fire) is Paśupati. 
Since agni is 
paśu and since he protects animals, 
the physical body of Paśupati is designated as 
agni.73 (trans. Tagare 1958: 106) 
The ācārya’s sacred fire symbolizes his union with 
Śiva. It also provides the ashes necessary for the 
disciple to undertake ritual cleansing and attain the 
same state, and it is central in the ritual of initia-
tion, in which the ācārya imposes the hand on the 
head of the sādhaka and then cuts his topknot. This 
is described in a passage of the Saṃskārakārikā. 
After the preparation involving the besmearing of 
73. nāma yadvai paśupatir ity uktaṃ pañcamaṃ mayā // 
45 pañcamī pañcamasyaiṣā tanur nāmnāgnir astu te / ity 
ukte yac charīrasthaṃ tejas tasyoṣṇasaṃjñitam // 46 viveśa 
tat tadā hy agniṃ tasmāt paśupatis tu saḥ / yasmād agniḥ 
paśuś cāsīd yasmāt pāti paś ūṃś ca saḥ // 47 tasmāt paśupates 
tasya tanur agnir nirucyate /.the disciple’s limbs with ashes and the purification 
of the body and soul (67 –80), the teacher should 
approach the Southern face (dakṣiṇāṃ mūrtim 
āśritaḥ, 79 ), and perform śivahasta (82 ):
Having meditated on Śiva in the [southern] 
face with devotion, he should meditate on the 
teacher who holds a staff, and think that his 
hand is placed on the head of the s ādhaka. (83) 
 The experienced teacher should perform 
the rite of renunciation with regard to materi
-
al [possessions] (dravya), mental states (bh ā-
va) and the 
[sacred] fire, and then cut off the 
topknot by the śivahasta reciting the mantras. 
(84)74 (trans. Acharya 2007: 46)
The prescription that the ācārya should approach, 
and meditate on, Śiva Dakṣiṇāmūrti and the teacher 
who holds a staff (śrīlakuladhāriṇam, i.e. Lakulīśa) 
while initiating the disciple near the ritual fire is 
relevant, and supports the associations we have 
suggested in the previous section. Indeed, beyond 
being crucial for the production of pure ashes, the 
sacred fire played a role in Pāśupata initiation and, 
possibly, soteriology too. While first-hand Pāśupa -
ta sources give us scant detail on this matter, some 
interesting information can be gleaned from the 
Paramokṣanirāsakārikā on a few (lost) verses of 
the Raurava by early Śaiva Saiddhāntika exegete 
Sadyojyotis (early 8th century) and the Vṛtti by 
Rāmakaṇṭha (early 11th century), where certain 
(pre-)Saiddhāntika Śaiva views, including various 
traditions of Pāśupata Śaivism, are refuted. While 
the discussion of these references would take us too 
far from the present subject, suffice here to say that 
the commentary on verse 3d associates the Pāśu -
patas with the soteriological position of  ‘having 
agency that belongs to fire’ ( āgneyakart ṛtva), which 
leads to ‘becoming the same as “The Treasury of 
Light”’ (samatvaṃ tejasaṃ nidheḥ), i.e. Fire (or 
the Sun), referring to liberation as the powers of 
the Lord being transferred into the liberated soul, 
74. dhyātvā m ūrtau śivaṃ bhaktyā śrīl akuladhāriṇaṃ 
gurum / tasya hastaṃ punar dhyāyed dattam sādhakam ūr-
dhani // 83 dravyabhāvāgnisaṃnyāsaṃ krtvā samyag 
vicakṣaṇaḥ / śikhācchedaṃ tataḥ kuryāc chivahastena 
mantrataḥ // 84 śivam ūrdhnā tris ūtrīṃ tu sādhakasya 
śikhāṃ nayet / pañcabrahmamayo hy eṣ
a śivahasto hy 
udāhṛtaḥ  // 85. 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   251 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 254] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin252
i.e. śikhāsaṅkrānti (Watson et al. 
2013: 222).75 It is, 
therefore, possible that Pāśupata initiation, while 
not having the liberating power of Mantramārga 
initiation, was conceived of as a preliminary met-
aphorical act implying the transference of powers 
from the Lord (via the teacher) to the initiated dis-
ciple, visualized as the identity between the sacred 
fire and its scintillae. This process would culmi-
nate after the death of the sādhaka with his final 
and complete union with Rudra. The transference 
would be symbolically enacted in this world and 
life during the initiation ritual, in which the ācārya 
(who embodies Śiva, after having literally become 
him through the ritual procedure and meditation) 
‘cuts’ the bond of the initiate, transfers the divine 
powers to him through the fire, and bestows upon 
him the gnosis (vidyā), intended as the Pāśupata 
scripture. This constellation of ideas and practices, 
especially the ritual of śivahasta discussed above, 
seems to be represented in the relief of the Bayon’s 
inner gallery, where an ācārya (doubling as Śiva), 
seated in the classic dakṣiṇām ūrti pose touches the 
head of the ascetic adept while both are surround-
ed by flames in the background (Fig. 7.15). Could 
the flames contouring both figures represent the 
‘transfer’ of divine powers from the ācārya-Śiva to 
the sādhaka? Many Śaiva ascetics are depicted on 
the inner gallery of the Bayon, some of which con-
toured with flames, which Provost-Roche (2010: 
53) interprets as a representation of their ascetic 
power (tapas).
Apart from Pāśupata dīkṣā, analogous ideas 
might have been at play in the tantric fire-ritual 
of homa, which, according to Gonda (1970: 85), 
represents ‘by means of techniques partly Vedic, 
partly purāṇic and partly Tantric, the enactment, 
in a gradual process of development, of the realiza-
tion of the unity of the worshipper’s soul, the place 
and material for worship and God.’ As we have 
suggested above, homa rituals may have been prac -
tised by some post-Pāśupata movements within the 
Atimārga, and such texts as the Saṃskārakārikā  
75. According to another interpretation, taking the 
meaning of śikhā (in the compound viśikhā occurring next 
to āgneyakartṛtva) to be ‘topknot’, this would be a reference 
to the ritual of the removal of the disciple’s topknot during 
the śivahasta part of initiation. These interpretations may 
not be mutually exclusive.stress the salvific role of fire-rituals, leading to 
union with Rudra (cf. above, p. 248 ); hence, it 
seems likely that the properly tantric varieties of 
this ritual that rose to prominence during the me-
dieval period could have stemmed from the pre-
tantric tradition. 
archaeological finds from the  
annex buildings
The archaeological finds from the annex buildings 
have not been systematically studied, but they may 
be worth looking at.76 These include two types  
of navagraha or nine planetary divinity friezes77 
76.  For a study on the archaeological contexts of the ‘rest -
house temples’, see Hendrickson 2008a.
77. The first type is usually found at the bottom of  
the wall that faces the eastern entrance of the annex build -
Fig. 7.15: Ācārya (doubling as Śiva) is blessing the 
ascetic amid flames. Inner gallery relief on the north 
wall between BY32 and BY33, 13th-century Bayon 
temple. (Photo: Shivani Kapoor)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   252 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 255] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples253
Fig. 7.16: 3D scanning of the navagraha panel seen in situ at the skirting level of the Preah Ko temple wall. 
(Photo: Olivier Cunin)
Fig. 7.17: Traces of a navagraha  panel at Prasat Khna annex building. (Photo: 
Shivani Kapoor)
(Figs. 7.16, 7.17 and 7.18 ), which according to 
Dagens (2003 : 193) could have been the object of 
ings. It can be still seen in situ at 9th-century Preah Ko (Fig. 
7.16), while a trace of it can be seen at Prasat Khna (Fig. 
7.17). The second type was seen at East Mebon according 
to Louis Malleret’s notes, with a reverse side carved with 
seven ascetics commonly understood as saptarṣi (Malleret 
1960). The frieze is now kept at the Angkor Conservation 
Depot (Fig. 7.18). It should be mentioned that only four of 
the nine divinities have been certainly identified as graha s, 
while the other five could correspond to directional deities 
(Bhattacharya 1961: 142–143). a specific cult until at least the 12 th century. The 
worship of planets was associated in both India and 
Kambujadeśa with rites of oblation to fire (homa; 
see Bhattacharya 1961 : 148; 1964 ). The cult of Fire 
held a special status in Khmer courts (Soutif 2009 : 
319), and might have been reserved an indepen -
dent cult in temples (Bhattacharya 1961 : 147). Nu-
merous inscriptions referring to lakṣahoma, and 
koṭihoma are documented in Khmer epigraphy.78 
78. K. 95 (st. XXVIII, Bergaigne 1893: 355); K. 300 (st. XX, 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   253 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 256] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin254
The AVP (31, 10.2), in the context of the koṭiho-
ma, specifies the importance of the ‘observance 
of Paśupati’ (paśupater vratam) also described 
in AVP 40, the knowledge of which is a requisite 
for the performance of this ceremony and the ob-
tainment of its fruits (etaj jñātvā tu yaḥ samyak 
koṭihomaṃ prayojayet / sarvān kāmān avāpnoti 
brahmalokaṃ sa gacchati). Sections of the AVPs 
IC, IV: 254); K. 418B (Finot 1904: 672–679; Cœdès 1929: 
305, 308); K. 692 (st. LIV, IC, I: 237); K. 933 (IC, IV: 47);  
K. 194 and K. 383 (Cœdès and Dupont 1943: 56–154); K. 806 
(st. CCXXXVI, IC, I: 73); K. 872 (st. XIII, IC, V: 97).were composed against a backdrop of Pāśupata 
Śaivism, and the performance of these rituals along 
with the presence of navagraha panels in annex 
buildings further corroborate their association with 
fire rituals and purohitas. Furthermore, there is a 
link between homa rituals and abhiṣeka or royal 
initiation, for the former were performed to over-
come any obstacles that might have arisen during 
the latter. Lokesh Chandra (1980 : 317) refers to a 
Japanese Buddhist maṇ ḍala ritual including among 
its steps the invocation of Agni as well as the nava-
grahas and signs of the Zodiac (rāśi).
Fig. 7.18: Second type of navagraha  frieze from East Mebon, kept at the conservation depot depicting navagraha s 
on one side and ascetics on the other (accession no. DCA.3506.A). (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   254 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 257] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples255
As pointed out by Soutif (2017 : 14), no fixed 
kuṇḍa has ever been recovered from a Khmer 
temple. At the Bayon, four fixed kuṇ ḍas have been 
identified as being depicted in the bas-reliefs in the 
southeastern sections of the second and third gal-
leries (ibid.), which is consistent with the direction 
of Agni and the location of the annex buildings. 
A quadrangular concave stone preserved at the 
National Museum of Cambodia (KA 442 ), dis -
covered at Sambor Prei Kuk, bears the formula 
oṃ jaiminaye svāhā (addressed to Agni’s wife) 
engraved on his four sides, and as such consti -
tutes one of the earliest examples of (movable) 
kuṇḍas (ibid.: 18). At Banteay Srei, a circular stone 
base was found in the south annex building, which 
bears certain markings. A similar square shaped 
stone was found in a north annex building of a 
Banteay Srei-style monument to the east of the 
North Khleang sanctuary in Angkor Thom. The 
function of these stones has not been ascertained 
yet, but they might be homa- kuṇḍas (Fig. 7.1
9).conclusion
A particular type of annex building was developed 
during the pre-Angkorian period within Khmer 
temples that continued to be erected for four cen-
turies. Commonly called ‘library buildings’, these 
structures remain a puzzle. This chapter has made 
a new attempt to understand the possible func -
tion(s) of the annex buildings, based on the Khmer 
inscriptions and evidence of Khmer Śaiva religious 
practices of the period as well as archaeological 
finds. It has also situated the majority of annex 
buildings in the context of Pāśupata practices in an 
āyatana space for initiation and other rituals that 
formed a backbone of the movement. Having re-
jected the idea that these buildings constituted ‘li-
braries’ in the sense of spaces for copying and stud -
ying text, our hypothesis is that the architecture, 
symbology, and actual functions of these buildings 
reflect a constellation of ideas and ritual practices 
involving a sacred fire, preparation of ashes, ini -
tiation by an ācārya, donation of the Śaiva knowl-
Fig. 7.19: 3D scanning of the archeological finds from the annex buildings by Olivier Cunin. The square shaped 
stone was found in the north annex building of the Banteay Srei-style monument to the east of the North Khleang 
at Angkor Thom. The circular shaped stone was found in the south annex building of Banteay Srei.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   255 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 258] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin256
edge and its material medias, i.e. manuscripts, and 
storage of the same. It is not impossible that the 
concept of the building stemmed from early ideas 
found in Pāśupata texts about the āyatana as a 
place provided with a fire for the production of 
ashes, the performance of bhasmasnāna, and in -
itiation rituals, and then developed into a space 
conceived for a ritualized Śaiva ‘cult of the book’, 
along the lines suggested by De Simini, during the 
period in which Mantramārga Śaivism was dom-
inant. This evolution might explain the possible 
dual purpose of the annex buildings. 
Khmer temples are normally viewed through 
the prism of Indian temple architecture, but the 
Khmers’ adaptation of Indic texts and rituals ac -
tually resulted in a unique vocabulary of art and 
architecture, which demands finding a different 
and independent perspective. To take the most 
striking examples, it is most rare to find an Indian 
temple that is a literal depiction of Mount Meru, 
such as one sees at Bakong, Bakheng, Preah Rup 
and Angkor Wat in Cambodia. Similarly, to seek an 
equivalent Indian structure for these Khmer temple 
annex buildings would be futile. The Khmer annex 
buildings are one of the many Indic art and archi-
tectural innovations created in Maritime Asia, and 
their function must be derived both from local evi-
dence and South Asian prescriptive literature. The 
annex building thus could represent either a purely 
Khmer innovation, or reflect early ideas found in 
Sanskrit prescriptive literature that have not been 
developed in the mediaeval temple architecture of 
the Indian subcontinent. As Minoru Hara (1966: 
70) observes:
The Cambodian transplantation of the Pāśupa-
ta seems to be more faithful to the original than 
that of southern India. This Cambodian faith-
fulness to a mainland original is parallel to the 
phenomena of Cambodian Sanskrit.
Such texts as the AVP and the Śivadharma/
Śivadharmottara, which mention some of the 
practices expounded in the PS, describe a fire -
place-building (agnyāgāra, etc.) for the observanc-
es of the pāśupatavrata (especially bhasmasnāna), 
while original Pāśupata sources like the GK and the 
Saṃskārakārikā give us more detailed descriptions 
of rituals of initiation carried out in the presence of the sacred fire. The kind of location prescribed for 
the ritual is usually at the southern/right side of the 
Lord, represented by an image, liṅga, or, in the case 
of a temple, the main sanctuary itself. The emplace -
ment and architecture of the annex buildings do 
fit these descriptions, being located approximately 
45 degrees southeast from the main shrine—the 
direction of Agni, associated with kitchens or fire 
shrines in prescriptive Śaiva literature. 
While the development of the annex building 
appears to be coterminous with the arrival and 
development of the Pāśupata sect in the Khmer 
domains, epigraphy from the Angkorian period 
reflects the presence of Śaiva Mantramārga tradi-
tions, similar to what may be seen in the Indian 
Subcontinent.79 But despite the arrival of new texts 
and the doctrinal and ritual evolution of Śaivism, 
evidence of the Pāśupata rituals established in 
the royal temples continues to be visible in the 
Khmer domains;80 and, as remarked by Sanderson 
(2003–2004: 435–436), Śaiva temples and associ -
ated hermitages for the support of Śaiva ascetics 
‘were institutions that appear to have remained 
unchanged in their fundamentals whatever the 
initiatory affiliation of the religious attached to 
them.’ Furthermore, Pāśupata beliefs and rituals 
may have been absorbed and reenacted by the 
generations of local practitioners as inherently 
Khmer: after the mid-10th century reign of Rā -
jendravarman II, the Pāśupata movement may 
have lost its influence on the royal elites over time 
as patronage specifically accorded to Pāśupata 
masters dropped from the inscriptional record, 
and Pāśupata practices appear to have been sub -
79. Sanderson (2003–2004: 435) argues that there were 
two waves of Śaivism in Kambujadeśa—the first, Atimārga, 
in pre-Angkorian inscriptions of the 7th and 8th centuries, 
the second, Mantramārga, from 9th to 14th centuries.
80. K. 95 (v. XXVII I, Barth 1885: 355); K. 300, v. XX (IC, IV: 
254); K. 418B (Finot 1904: 672–679, Cœdès 1929: 289–330); 
K. 692, v. LIV (IC, I: 237); K. 933 (IC, IV: 47); K. 194 and  
K. 383 (Cœdès and Dupont 1943: 56–154); K. 806, v. 
CCXXXVI  (IC, I: 73); K. 872, v. XIII  (IC, V: 97). See also 
Melville Bolling and von Negelein 
1909: xxx–xxxi, 179–93. 
Cf. also the testimony about Pāśupata Brahmins of the 
Chinese envoy Zhou Daguan, who spent a year at Angkor 
in 1296–1297 (see Chemburkar, this volume), and the ‘post-
Bayon-phase’ reliefs at the Bayon (Provost-Roche 2010), 
which appear to depict Śaiva ascetics who may very well 
have been Pāśupatas.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   256 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 259] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples257
sumed as standard Khmer Śaiva religious traditions. 
The architecture of annex buildings did see many 
modifications during this period, again reflecting 
a changing Śaiva religious programme, including 
a movement away from ascetic practices towards a 
temple-based, king-sponsored worship and ritual 
involving homa. It is therefore possible that the 
usage of those buildings changed over time, and 
the architectural development of these structures 
during the successive centuries is a silent testimo-
nial to the evolution of religious practices, which 
caused the adaptation of those buildings by the 
Khmer royalty.
Primary Sources
Ajitāgama: Ajitāgama, Vol. I, ed. by N.R. Bhatt. 
Pondichéry: Institut français d’Indologie, 1964.
Atharvavedapariśiṣṭas : The Pariśiṣṭas of the Athar-
vaveda, Vol. 1, Part 1 and 2, ed. by  George Mel -
ville Bolling and Julius von Negelein. Leipzig: 
Otto Harrassowitz, 1909–1910.  [cf. Bisschop 
and Griffiths 2003]
Bhuvanakośa: palm-leaf manuscript (lontar) 
Leiden Cod. Or. 5022 (ca. 1878 CE), Balinese 
script.
Brahmāṇ ḍa Purāṇ a: Brahm āṇḍa-mah ā-pur āṇa. 
[Mumbai:] Śrī-Venkate śvara, 1857.
Gaṇakārikā of Ācārya Bhāsarvajña with the Rat -
naṭīkā  and four appendices including the 
Kāravaṇa-Māhātmya, ed. by C.D. Dalal. Gaek -
wad’s Oriental Series no. 15. Baroda: Oriental 
Institute Baroda, 1966 [1920].
Mattavil āsa: Mattavil āsa Prahas ana, ed. and tr. by 
Narayanan Parameswaran Unni. Delhi: Nag 
Publishers, 1998. 
Niśvāsaguhya: e-text of in-progress edition of 
the Guhyas ūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, 
prepared by Dominic Goodall, with the con -
tribution of Diwakar Acharya, Peter Bisschop 
and Nirajan Kafle, from MS NAK 1-227, supple -
mented with readings from its two Devan āgarī 
apographs, MS 5-2401, NGMPP Reel No. A 
159/18 and Sanskrit MS i.33 of the Wellcome 
Institute for the History of Medicine, London. 
Pāśupatas ūtra: Pasupata Sutras with Pancartha-  
bhashya of Kaundinya, ed. by R. Anantakrishna 
Sastri. Trivandrum: The Oriental Manuscript 
Library of the University of Travancore, 1940. Pañcārthabhāṣya, see Pāśupatas ūtra.
Ratnaṭīkā, see Gaṇakārikā
. 
Saṃskārakārikā, see Acharya 2007.
Śatapathabrāhmaṇa:  Madhyamdina recension, ed. 
by H.S. Ananthanarayana and W.P. Lehman. 
GRETIL – Göttingen Register of Electronic 
Texts in Indian Languages and related Indolog -
ical materials from Central and Southeast Asia 
(http://fiindolo.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gret_utf.
htmSatBr).
Śivadharma: transcript IFP/EFEO 860, copied 
from R2442 G.O.M.L., Madras.
Śivadharmottara: transcript IFP/EFEO 72, from 
page 25 copied from Adyar Library Madras 
ms. no. 75425.
Soma śambhupaddhati,  see Brunner-Lachaux 1963.
Vāyu Purāṇa: Vāyupurāṇam. Poona: Anandasra-
ma Sanskrit Series, 1860.
References
Acharya, Diwakar. 2007. ‘The Saṃskāravidhi: A 
Manual on the Transformatory Rite of the 
Lakulīśa Pāśupatas’, in Dominic Goodall and 
André Padoux (eds.), Mélanges tantriques à la 
mémoire d’Hélène Brunner, pp. 27–48. Pondi -
cherry: Institut fran çais de Pondich éry/École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Acri, Andrea. 2014. ‘The Śaiva Atim ārga in the Light  
of Niśvāsaguhya 12.1–22ab ’, Cracow Indological 
Studies 16: 7–49.
Agrawala, Om Prakash. 1984. Conservation of 
Manuscripts and Paintings of Southeast Asia. 
London: Butterworths.
Arahi, Hsiao. 2000. ‘ Étude de la chronologie relative 
de la “bibliothèque” sud du temple de Banteay 
Kdei’, in Barom Neth, Chiev Khus, and Henri 
Locard (eds.), The 2nd International Conference 
on Khmer Studies Proceedings. Phnom Penh: 
Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport and 
Royal University of Phnom Penh.
Bakker, Hans. 2001. ‘Dakṣiṇām ūrti’, in Klaus 
Karttunen and Petteri Koskikallio (eds.), 
Vidyārṇavavandanam: Essays in Honour of 
Asko Parpola (Studia Orientalia 94), pp. 41–53. 
Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society.
. 2004. ‘At the Right Side of the Teacher’, in 
Phyllis Granoff and Koichi Shinohara (eds.), 
Imagination, Imagery, and Image in Vedic and 
Śaiva Initiation, Images in Asian Religions: Texts 
and Contexts, pp. 127–129. Toronto: UBC Press.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   257 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 260] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin258
. 2014. The World of the Skandapurāṇa: 
Northern India in the Sixth and Seventh Centu-
ries. Leiden: Brill.
Barth, Auguste. 1885. Inscriptions sanscrites de 
Cambodge (extraits des notices et extraits des 
manuscrits de la Biblioth èque nationale 27, 1ère 
partie, 1er fascicule),  pp. 1–181. Paris: Imprimerie 
Nationale.
Bergaigne, Abel. 1893. Inscriptions sanscrites du 
Campā et du Cambodge (extraits des notices et 
extraits des manuscrits de la Bibliothèque na -
tionale 27, 2e partie, 2e fascicule), pp. 181–632. 
Paris: Imprimerie Nationale.
Bhandarkar, D.R. 1931. ‘Mathurā Pillar Inscription 
of Chandragupta II’, Epigraphia Indica 21.
Bhandarkar, R.G. 1913. Vaiṣṇavism, Śaivism and 
Minor Religious Systems. Grundriss der in -
do-arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde 
Bd. 3, Hft. 6. Strassburg: Trübner. 
Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar. 1955. ‘La secte des 
Pāçupata dans l’ancien Cambodge’, Journal 
Asiatique 243/2: 479–490.
. 1961. Les Religions brahmaniques de l’ancien  
Cambodge, d’après l’épigraphie et l’iconographie . 
Paris: Publications de l’ École française d’Ex-
trême-Orient.
. 1964. ‘Notes d’iconographie khmère’, Arts 
Asiatiques 10/1: 91–94.
Bisschop, Peter. 2006. Early Śaivism and the 
Skandapurāṇa: Sects and Centres. Gronin-
gen Oriental Studies XXI. Groningen: Egbert 
Forsten.
Bisschop, Peter and Arlo Griffiths. 2003. ‘The Pāśu -
pata Observance (Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa 40)’, 
Indo-Iranian Journal 46: 315–348.
Brunner-Lachaux, H élène (trans.). 1963. So-
maśambhupaddhati: Le rituel quotidien dans 
la tradition śivaïte de l’Inde du Sud selon So -
maśambhu. Vol. 1 of 4 vols. Pondicherry: In -
stitut fran çais d’Indologie. 
Chemburkar, Swati and Shivani Kapoor. 2018. 
‘Pāśupata Sect in Ancient Cambodia and 
Champa: Art Historical Evidence’, in Trần Kỳ 
Phương, Võ Văn Thắng, and Peter D. Shar -
rock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces 
of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture ,  
pp. 45–57. Bangkok: River Books.
Cœdès, George. 1911. ‘ Études ca
mbodgiennes. VI. 
Des édicules appelés « bibliothèques »’, Bul-letin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 11: 
405–406.
. 1929. ‘ Études cambodgiennes. XXIII. La 
date du temple de Bantāy Srëi’, Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 29: 289–330.
. 1932. ‘ Études cambodgiennes. XXX. À la 
recherché du Yaçodharāçrama’, Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 32/1: 84–112.
. [IC] 1937–1966. Inscriptions du Cambodge, 
éditées et traduites, vols. I–VIII. Hanoi and 
Paris: École française d’Extr ême-Orient.
. 1940. ‘ Études cambodgiennes. XXXV. Les 
gîtes d’étape à la fin du XIIe sìecle’, Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 40: 347–349.
Cœdès, George and Pierre Dupont. 1943. ‘Les stèles 
de Sdok Kăk Thoṃ, Phnoṃ Sandak et Práḥ 
Vihãr’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 43: 56–134.
Colas, Gérard. 1986. Le temple selon Marīci. Extraits 
de la Marīci-saṃhitā étudiés, édités et traduits. 
Pondichéry: Institut français de Pondichéry.
Collins, Charles D. 1982. ‘Elephanta and the Ritual 
of the Lakul īśa-Pāśupatas ’, Journal of the Ameri-
can Oriental Society 102/4 (October–December): 
605–617.
Cunin Olivier. 2004. De Ta Prohm au Bayon: 
Analyse comparative de I’histoire architecturale 
des principaux monuments Khmers du style du 
Bayon, Volume I. PhD dissertation, Institut 
National Polytechnique de Lorraine. 
Dagens, Bruno. 1977. Les enseignements architectu-
raux de l’Ajitāgama et du Rauravāgama. Pon-
dichéry: Institut français d’Indologie.
. 2003. Les Khmers. Paris: Soci été d’édition 
des belles lettres.
Dagens, Bruno and Marie-Luce Barazer-Billoret. 
2000. Le Rauravāgama: un traité de rituel et de 
doctrine śiva ïte. Pondichéry: Institut français 
de Pondichéry.
Datta, Bimal Kumar. 1960. Libraries and Librarian-
ship of Ancient and Medieval India. New Delhi: 
Atma Ram & Sons. 
De Simini, Florinda. 2016. Of Gods and Books: 
Ritual Knowledge and Transmission in the 
Manuscript Cultures of Premodern India. Berlin/
Boston: De Gruyter.
Dresden, Mark Jan. 1941. Mānavagṛhyas ūtra: A 
Vedic Manual of Domestic Rites. Translation, 
Commentary and Preface. Groningen/Batavia: 
J.B. Wolter.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   258 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 261] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples259
Estève, Julia. 2009. Étude critique des phénomènes 
de syncrétisme religieux dans le Cambodge 
angkorien.  PhD dissertation, École Pratique 
des Hautes Études.
Ferstl, Christian. 2015. ‘Overlooked Material for 
the Study of P āśupata Śaivism: The satirical 
play Mattavil āsaprahasana’. Pre-print draft
 
dated 17 July 2015, to appear in Ernst Prets and 
Hiroshi Marui (eds.), Transmission and Tradi-
tion. Vienna: VÖAW. [Last accessed September 
2021 at https://www.academia.edu/12332050/
Overlooked_Material_for_the_Study_of_Pāśu -
pata_Śaivism_The_satirical_play_Mattavilāsa- 
prahasana]
Finot, Louis. 1904. ‘Notes d’épigraphie. VII  . L’ins -
cription de Práḥ Khan’, Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 4/3: 672–679.
. 1912. ‘Notes d’épigraphie. XIII. L’inscrip -
tion de Ban That’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 12/2: 1–28.
. 1925. ‘Dharmaçâlâs au Cambodge’, Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 25/3–4: 
417–422.
. 1928. ‘Nouvelle Inscriptions de Sambor’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
28/1: 43–46.
Foucher, Alfred C.A. 1903. ‘Nouvelles et Mélang -
es. Critique de E. Lunet de Lajonquière, 1902, 
Inventaire descriptif des monuments du Cam-
bodge’, Journal Asiatique 10: 174–180.
Gonda, Jan. 1969. ‘Āyatana’, Adyar Library Bulletin  
23: 1–79.
. 1970. Vaiṣṇavism and Śaivism: A Compar-
ison. London: Athlone Press.
Goodall, Dominic. 2015. ‘On K. 1049, A Tenth-Cen -
tury Cave Inscription from Battambang and on 
the Sectarian Obedience of the Śaiva Ascetics 
of Non-Royal Cave Inscriptions of Cambodia’, 
UDAYA: Journal of Khmer Studies 13: 3–34.
. 2017. ‘What Information can be Gleaned 
from Cambodian Inscriptions about Practices 
Relating to the Transmission of Sanskrit Liter-
ature?’, in Vincenzo Vergiani, Daniele Cuneo 
and Camillo Alessio Formigatti (eds.), Indic 
Manuscript Cultures through the Ages: Materi-
al Historical Investigation, pp. 131–160. Berlin/
Boston: De Gruyter.Hara, Minoru. 1966. Materials for the Study of 
Pāśupata Śaivism. PhD dissertation, Harvard 
University.
Hendrickson, Mitch. 2008a. ‘People Around the 
Houses with Fire: Archaeological Investigation 
of Settlement around the Jayavarman VII “Rest -
house” Temples’, UDAYA: Journal of Khmer 
Studies 9: 63–79.
. 2008b. Arteries of Empire: An Operational 
Study of Transport and Communication in An-
gkorian Southeast Asia (9th to 15th Centuries). 
PhD dissertation, University of Sydney.
IC, see Cœd ès, George. 
Jacques, Claude. 1968. ‘La st èle de Phnom Sr ès’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
54: 605–622. 
Jacques, Claude and Philippe Lafond. 2004. L’Em-
pire Khmer: Cités et sanctuaires, Vème-XIIIème 
siècle. Paris: Fayard. 
. 2007. The Khmer Empire, Cities and Sanc-
tuaries from the 5th to the 13th Century. Bangkok: 
River Books.
Kafle, Nirajan. 2020. Niśvāsamukhatattvasaṃhitā: 
A Preface to the Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra 
(on Non-Tantric Śaivism at the Dawn of the 
Mantramārga); Critical Edition, with Intro -
duction & Annotated Translation and an Ap-
pendix Containing Śivadharmasaṅgraha 5–9. 
Pondicherry: Institut français de Pondichéry/
École française d’Extr ême-Orient/Asien-Afrika 
Institut, Universität Hamburg.
Kapoor, Shivani. 2019. ‘Iconography of Pashupa -
ta Ascetics in Cambodia’, Orientations 50/1: 
122–131.
Kashikar, C.G. 1964. The Śrauta, Paitṛmedhika 
and Pariśeṣa s ūtras of Bharadvāja. Critically 
edited and translated, part 2. Poona: Vaidika 
Saṃśodhana Maṇḍala.
Lefèvre, Vincent. 2011. Portraiture in Early India: 
Between Transience and Eternity. Leiden: Brill. 
Lockwood, Michael, A. Vishnu Bhat, and Mahendra 
Vikrama Varma. 1995. Metatheater and San -
skrit Drama. Madras/New Delhi: Tambaram 
Research Associates/Munshiram Manoharlal 
Publishers.
Lokesh Chandra. 1980. ‘Chandi Mendut and Pawon: 
A New Interpretation’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 136/2–3: 313–320.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   259 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 262] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin260
Lunet de Lajonquière, Étienne. 1902–1911. Inven-
taire descriptif des monuments du Cambodge 
(3 vols.). Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Majumdar, R.C. 1953. Inscriptions of Kambuja. Cal-
cutta: The Asiatic Society.
Malleret, Louis. 1960. ‘Contribution à l’étude du 
thème des neuf divinités dans la sculpture du 
Cambodge et du Champa’, Arts Asiatiques 7/3: 
205–230.
Mankodi, Kirit. 1988. ‘Śaiva Panels of Ellora and El -
ephanta: Yogíśvara or Dakṣiṇāmūrti’, in Ratan 
Parimoo, Deepak Kannal, and Shivaji Panikkar 
(eds.), Ellora Caves, Sculptures and Architecture: 
Collected Papers of the University Grants Com-
mission’s National Seminar, pp. 278–284. New 
Delhi: Books and Books.
Marchal, Hénri. 1931. ‘Chronique’, Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 31: 563–650.
Maxwell, Thomas S. 2007. ‘The Stele Inscription 
of Preah Khan, Angkor: Text with Translation 
and Commentary’, UDAYA: Journal of Khmer 
Studies 8: 1–85.
. 2009. ‘A New Sanskrit and Khmer Inscrip-
tion at Banteay Chhmar’, UDAYA: Journal of 
Khmer Studies 10: 162–163.
Maxwell, Thomas S. and Jaroslav Poncar. 2006. Of 
Gods, Kings, and Men: The Reliefs of Angkor Wat. 
Chiang Mai: Silkworm.
van der Meij, Th.C. 2017. Indonesian Manuscripts 
from the Islands of Java, Madura, Bali and 
Lombok. Leiden/Boston: Brill. 
Monier-Williams, Monier. 1899. Sanskrit-English 
Dictionary. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Multzer o’Naghten. 2014. ‘The Organisation of 
Space in Pre-modern Thailand under Jayavar-
man VII’, in Nicolas Revire and Stephen A. 
Murphy (eds.), Before Siam: Essays in Art 
and Archaeology, pp. 396–419. Bangkok: River 
Books/The Siam Society.
Padoux, André et al. 2000. Tāntrikābhidhāna-
kośa: dictionnaire des termes techniques de la 
littérature hindoue tantrique (A Dictionary of 
Technical Terms from Hindu Tantric Literature).  
Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften. 
Pathak, V.S. 1980. History of Śaiva Cults in Northern 
India from Inscriptions (700 A.D. to 1200 A.D.). 
Varanasi: Ram Naresh Sharma. Payne, Richard K. 2011. ‘Ritual Studies in the Longue 
Durée: Comparing Shingon and Śaiva Siddh ānta 
Homas’, Pacific World, Journal of the Institute of 
Buddhist Studies, Third Series 13 (Fall): 223–262.
Pottier, Christophe. 2000. ‘À la recherché de Go-
loupura’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-
Orient 87/1: 79–107.
Provost-Roche, Ludivine. 2010. ‘Nouvelles perspec -
tives pour la connaissance de l’histoire de la fin 
de la période angkorienne au Cambodge: notes 
sur quelques bas-reliefs de la galerie intérieure 
du Bayon’, Arts Asiatiques 65: 79–94. 
Sanderson, Alexis. 2001. ‘History through Textual 
Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the Pa ñcarātra 
and the Buddhist Yogin ītantras’, in Fran çois 
Grimal (ed.), Les Sources et le temps. Sources 
and Time: A Colloquium, Pondicherry, 11–13 
January 1997, pp. 1–47. Collection Indologie 
91. Pondicherry: Institut fran çais de Pondich éry/
École fran çaise d’Extrême-Orient. 
. 2003–2004. ‘The Śaiva Religion Among the 
Khmers, Part I’, Bulletin de l’Ecole fran çaise 
d’Extr ême-Orient 90–91: 349–463. 
. 2006. ‘The Lākulas: New Evidence of a 
System Intermediate between Pāñcārthika Pāśu -
patism and Āgamic Śaivism’, Ramalinga Reddy 
Memorial Lectures, 1997, The Indian Philosoph -
ical Annual 24: 143–217.
Sankaranarayanan, S. 1993. ‘Sanskrit Education in 
Ancient Tamil Country’, The Adyar Library 
Bulletin 57: 7–33.  
Shimoda, Ichita and Sae Shimamoto. 2012. ‘Spatial 
and Chronological Sketch of the Ancient City 
of Sambor Prei Kuk’, Aséanie 30: 11–74.
Sircar, D.C. 1942. ‘A Note on the Mathurā Inscrip-
tion of Chandra Gupta II’, Indian Historical 
Quarterly 18/2: 271.
Soutif, Dominique. 2009. Organisation religieuse et 
profane du temple khmer du VII ème au XIII ème 
siècle. Volume I: Les biens du dieu. PhD disser-
tation, Universit é Sorbo nne Nouvelle–Paris III.
. 2017. ‘Le feu sacré: étude archéologique et 
épigraphique d’un rituel du Cambodge ancien’, 
in Azedine Beschaouch, Franciscus Verellen, 
and Michel Zink (eds.), Deux décennies de coo-
pération archéologique franco-cambodgienne à 
Angkor, pp. 9–25. Paris: Académie des Inscrip-
tions et Belles-Lettres.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   260 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 263] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples261
Tagare, C.V. 1958. The Brahmāṇ ḍa Purāna. Part I. 
Translated and Annotated by G.V. Tagare. New 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Törzsök, Judith. 2020. ‘Why are the Skull-Bearers 
(Kāpālikas) called Soma?’, in Dominic Goodall, 
Shaman Hatley, Harunaga Isaacson, and Srilata 
Raman (eds.), Śaivism and the Tantric Tradi -
tion: Essays in Honour of Alexis G.J.S. Sanderson, 
pp. 33–46. Leiden/Boston: Brill.Watson, Alex, Dominic Goodall and Anjaneya 
Sarma. 2013. An Enquiry into the Nature of 
Liberation; Bha ṭṭa Rāmaka ṇṭha’s Paramok ṣa- 
nirāsakārikāvṛtti, a commentary on Sadyojyo -
tiḥ’s refutation of twenty conceptions of the lib-
erated state (mok ṣa), for the first time critically 
edited, translated into English and annotated. 
Pondicherry: Institut fran çais de Pondich éry/
École fran çaise d’Extrême-Orient.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   261 11/2/22   3:44 PM

--- [Page 264] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin262Appendix 7.1
Photographic Database of Annex Buildings in Khmer Temples
Annex Buildings at Bakong—Type A
Ascetic figures on the south wall of a southeast annex building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)Southeast view of the annex buildings.
(Photo: Swati Chemburkar)West view of the southeast annex buildings. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   262 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 265] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples263Annex Building at Preah Ko—Type A
Chimney-like interior of the southeast annex building. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)
Navagraha panel at skirting level of the east wall of the southeast annex 
building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)West view of the southeast annex building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   263 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 266] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin264Annex Buildings at Prasat Khna (r)—Type A
Possible Navagraha panel at a skirting level of the east wall of annex 
building. (Photo: Shivani Kapoor)
Southwest view of the southeast annex building. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   264 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 267] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples265Annex Buildings at Phnom Krom—Type A
Phnom Krom: four annex buildings are seen from the 
eastern entrance (two situated in the northeast and two 
in the southeast  quarter of the temple). (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)East view of the southeast annex buildings: one in stone 
and one in brick. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)West view of the southeast annex 
buildings in brick. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   265 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 268] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin266
Annex Buildings at Phnom Bok—Type A
North view of the four annex buildings as seen on the left side: two in stone 
and two in brick (the brick buildings are in ruins). (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)West view of the northeast and southeast annex buildings. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   266 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 269] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples267Annex Buildings at Prasat Pram—Type A
Two annex building are seen from the east side. The brick one is on the left (southeast) and the 
laterite one without ventilation system is on the right side (northeast). (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)East view of the southeast annex building in brick. 
(Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   267 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 270] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin268
Annex Buildings at Preah Rup—Type A
Northeast annex building. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)South view of the northeast annex building. (Photo: 
Swati Chemburkar)Chimney-like interior of the northeast annex 
building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   268 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 271] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples269Annex Buildings at Ta Keo—Type B
West view of the southeast annex 
building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)South view of the southeast annex building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar) Interior view of the southeast annex 
building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   269 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 272] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin270Annex Buildings at Banteay Srei—Type B
South view of the southeast annex building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
West view of the northeast 
annex building. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)
Southeast annex building with false 
door on the western side. (Photo: 
Swati Chemburkar)
West view of the southeast 
annex building. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   270 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 273] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples271Annex Buildings at the Banteay Srei style temple at the east of North Khleang in Angkor Thom—Type B
Southeast view of the northeast annex building. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar) Northwest view of the southeast annex building. (Photo: Shivani Kapoor)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   271 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 274] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin272
Annex Buildings at Chau Srei Vibol—Type B
Southwest view of the northeast annex building. (Photo: Olivier Cunin) Northwest view of the southeast annex building. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   272 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 275] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples273Annex Buildings at Phimai and Phnom Rung—Variant of Type B and Type B
Phimai: northeast view of the west annex building, variant of Type B. 
(Photo: Olivier Cunin)Phnom Rung: west view of the southeast annex building, Type B. 
(Photo: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   273 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 276] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin274Annex Buildings at Thommanon and Banteay Samre—Type B
Thommanon: northwest view of the southeast annex building. 
(Photo: Olivier Cunin)
Banteay Samre: west view of the southeast annex building. 
(Photo: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   274 11/2/22   3:45 PM

--- [Page 277] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples275Annex Buildings at Angkor Wat—Type C
North view of the southwest annex building in the second enclosure. 
(Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
Northwest annex building in the third enclosure. 
(Photo: Swati Chemburkar)South view of the southwest annex building in the inner enclosure. 
(Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
Southwest annex building in the third enclosure. 
(Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   275 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 278] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin276
Annex Buildings at Ta Prohm of Angkor—Type B and Variant Type B
(TP 3) Northwest view of the southeast annex building,  
Type B. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)(TP 43) Northeast view of the southeast annex building, 
variant of Type B. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)(TP 43) Southeast annex 
building interior. (Photo: Swati 
Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   276 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 279] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples277Annex buildings at Preah Khan of Angkor and Banteay Kdei—Type B and variant of Type B
(BK 7) West view of the southeast annex 
building of Banteay Kdei, variant of 
Type B. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)(PK 5) Northwest view of the southeast annex building of Preah Khan of 
Angkor, Type B. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)(BK 13) West view of the northeast 
annex building of Banteay Kdei, variant 
of Type B. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   277 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 280] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin278Annex Buildings at Banteay Chhmar—Type A, variant of Type B and Type C
(BC 88) Banteay Chhmar: south view of Type C annex building. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)
(BC 15) Banteay Chhmar: southwest view of variant of 
Type B annex building. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)(BC 64) Banteay Chhmar: northwest 
view of variant of Type B annex 
building. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)(BC 45) Banteay Chhmar: northeast view of Type A annex 
building. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   278 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 281] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples279Annex Buildings at Wat Nokor—Type B
West view of the southeast annex building. 
(Photo: Olivier Cunin)West view of the northeast annex building. (Photo: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   279 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 282] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin280Annex Buildings at the Bayon—Type B and Type C
(BY50) and (BY51): Variant of Type B annex buildings.  
(Photo: Olivier Cunin)
(BY16-left) and (BY21-right): Type B annex buildings in front 
of the central sanctuary. (3D reconstruction: Olivier Cunin)
(BY53) West view of the southeast annex building in the outer 
enclosure: Type C. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
(BY54) South view of the northeast annex building in the 
outer enclosure. (Photo: Swati Chemburkar)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   280 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 283] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples281Gîte d’étapes, Dharmaśālā or Resthouse
‘Resthouse buildings’: top left: Ta Prohm; top right: Preah Khan of Angkor; bottom left: Preah Khan of Kompong Svay; bottom right: 
Banteay Chhmar. (Photos: Olivier Cunin)
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   281 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 284] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin282
Appendix 7.2
Brief Survey of the Annex Buildings in Khmer Temples1
 
Ye ar Date R
eining King Temple Province IK No.No. of Annex 
Buildings/TypeArchaeological 
FindsInscription
700 616–628 Īśānavarman Sambor Prei 
Kuk, Temple N10 Kompong Thom 164,00 
(following Bruguier)An initial open pillared structure underwent four stages of construction showing strong similarities to later annex buildings (Shimoda and Shimamoto 2012). Navagraha frieze from the Sambor Prei Kuk temple site (exact findspot unknown; published by Malleret 1960: 207, Fig. 1). 
800 790–835 Jayavarman II            
835–877 Jayavarman III Bakong (stage I) Rolous group, Siem 
Reap584,00 Two (Type A) with 
ventilation system in the southeast, two other annex buildings with same design in the northeast, one in the southwest, and one in the northwest but without any ventilation system.Navagraha frieze (see EFEO CAM19417-3- DCA no. 4363) and Auṃ metal symbol (EFEO CAM25081-4- DCA no. 7313). 
877–c. 886 Indravarman I Preah Ko and 
Bakong (stage II)Rolous Group, Siem Reap585,00 One (Type A) In situ frieze of 
nine planets at the bottom of the wall facing the main entrance of the library building in the southeast.  
Prasat Khna(r)  Preah Vihear 315,00 One (Type A) Navagraha frieze, 
probably placed at skirting level of the wall facing the entrance of the southeastern building.K. 355 on the doorjamb of the south annex building, calling this building a pustakāśrama .
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   282 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 285] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples283Ye ar Date Reining King Temple Province IK No.No. of Annex 
Buildings/TypeArchaeological 
FindsInscription
Prasat Trapeang 
Srange or Dei Dom Siem Reap 588,00 Two (in ruins)   K. 937 on the left door pillar of the south annex building, calling it a fire shrine.
Additions to pre-Angkorian temple of Phnom BayangTa Keo 3,00 At least one (probable 
addition in the 10th century to the pre-Angkorian temple: see image EFEO CAM 00811)   
889–c. 915 Y aśovarman I Bakheng Siem Reap 496,00 Two (Type A) A very ruined 
Navagraha frieze on the back of the pavilion, at the left of the esplanade (Malleret 1960: 206). 
Phnom Krom Siem Reap 501,00 Four: two in stone and 
two in brick (Type A)Navagraha frieze from the northwestern library (CA: 4715 and EFEO CAM 00878). 
Prasat Phnom BokSiem Reap 547,00 Four: two in stone and 
two in brick (Type A)   
      Work on Bayang          
900 c. 915–923 Harṣavarman I Work on Bayang          
c. 928–941 Jayavarman IV Prasat Pram Koh Ker Group, 
Preah Vihear265,00 Two (Type A): 
southern in brick with ventilation system, northern in laterite without ventilation system and central pedestal.   
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   283 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 286] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin284
Ye ar Date Reining King Temple Province IK No.No. of Annex 
Buildings/TypeArchaeological 
FindsInscription
944–968 Rājendravarman East Mebon or 
Mebon OrientalSiem Reap 531,00 Two (Type A) in the 
southeastern corner 
with possibly some ventilation system and three others with similar design but without ventilation system.A Navagraha frieze placed at the skirt-ing level of the wall facing the eastern entrance (EFEO CAM 19416.3). A 15 cm wide pedestal from the far end of the southeastern building, which possibly housed a Navagraha slab. A slab with nine holes from the second southeastern building, which would have possibly housed nine indi-vidual planets (in situ). A row of seven ascetic-frieze from the northwestern building (EFEO CAM 19417.1), currently kept at the Depot DCA no. 3506-a-b (Malleret 1960: 209). 
Preah Rup Siem Reap 538,00 Two (Type A)
A Navagraha frieze 
from the northwest -
ern building (EFEO 
CAM 13083) and a seven ascetic-frieze from the southeast-
ern building (EFEO 
CAM 13082). 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   284 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 287] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples285Ye ar Date Reining King Temple Province IK No.No. of Annex 
Buildings/TypeArchaeological 
FindsInscription
  968–1000 Jayavarman V  Ta keo Siem Reap 533,00 Two (Type B) Pedestal with 
nine mortises 
(DCA.6788/N.179) from the south -
eastern library at the second level, according to the report of Angkor Conservation.   
      Banteay Srei Siem Reap 546,02 Two (Type B) Three Gaṇeśas, 
one small liṅga, one kneeling male figure and one male figure on Garuda from the south -
ern building (for identification, see Multzer o’Naghten 2014;  CA: 3157, MNC: CA_02816 and EFEO CAM 0736)1. One circular object with central pedestal (CA: 3216; see reconstruction images by Cunin). 
      Banteay Srei style temple at the east of North KhleangAngkor Thom, Siem Reap480,06 Two (Type B: see 
image EFEO CAM 02138)Navagraha frieze from the northwest-ern building (EFEO CAM 13083); and seven ascetic-frieze from the southeast-ern building (EFEO CAM 13082). 
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   285 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 288] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin286
Ye ar Date Reining King Temple Province IK No.No. of Annex 
Buildings/TypeArchaeological 
FindsInscription
1000 1001–1002 Udayādityavar-
man I          
1002–1010 Jayavīravarman Continuation of 
Ta Keo         
1002–1049 Sūryavarman I Chau Srei Vibol Siem Reap 564,00 Two (Type B)    
Prasat Kuk Tra-
peang RopouSiem Reap 518,00 One (In ruin; see 
image EFEO CAM 1014)  K. 691 on the door pillar of the south-ern annex building, mentioning it as a fire shrine.
Preah Vihear Preah Vihear 398,00 Two (Type B)    
Phnom Chisor Ta Keo 23,00 One (Type B: see 
images EFEO CAM 15908.07 and CAM 15909.19)   
1050–1066 Udayādityavar-
man II           
1066–1080 Harṣavarman III            
1080–c.1107 Jayavarman VI Phimai Nakhon Ratchasi-
ma, Thailand447,00 One (variant of Type 
B)    
      Banteay Samre Siem Reap 541,00 Two (Type B)    
1100 1107–1112 Dharaṇīndravar-
man IWork on Bayang          
    Phnom Rung Buriram, Thailand 596,00 One (Type B) in the 
southeast   
1113–c.1149 Sūryavarman II Angkor Wat Siem Reap 497,00 Six (Type C: two in 
the third enclosure, two in the second enclosure, and two in the first enclosure).   
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   286 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 289] ---
Reinterpreting the Function of ‘ Annex Buildings’ in Khmer Śaiva Temples287Ye ar Date Reining King Temple Province IK No.No. of Annex 
Buildings/TypeArchaeological 
FindsInscription
c. 1149–
1180Tribhuvanāditya-varmanChau Say Tevoda Siem Reap 489,00 Two (Type B)    
Thommanon Siem Reap 490,00 One (Type B)    
Beng Melea Siem Reap 214,00 Four (two are Type B, 
placed in enclosure I, and two belong to Type C, placed in en-closure III; see image EFEO CAM 10964).   
1181– c. 1220Jayavarman VII Ta prohm Siem Reap 534,00 Two: TP3 (enclosure 
I, Type B), TP43 (enclosure II, variant of Type B)   
Preah Khan of AngkorSiem Reap 522,00 Eight (all Type B): 
PK3, PK35, PK5 (enclosure I), PK64, PK67 (enclosure  III), PK75, PK98 and PK122 (in the south, west and north annex complexes).Navagraha frieze from enclosure III, northern cloister, southeastern court-yard (published by Bhattacharya 1957; kept at the Depot, no. 7501; old photo: EFEO CAM 13834). 
Banteay Kdei Siem Reap 535,00 Two: BK7, BK13 
enclosure I, variant of Type B   
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   287 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 290] ---
Shivani Kapoor, Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, and Olivier Cunin288
Ye ar Date Reining King Temple Province IK No.No. of Annex 
Buildings/TypeArchaeological 
FindsInscription
Banteay Chhmar Siem Reap 816,00 Eleven: BC15, BC20, 
BC64 (enclosure I, 
variant of Type B), BC45 (enclosure II, Type A), BC81, BC88 (enclosure III, Type C), BC103, BC92SW (north and south an-nex complexes, Type B),  BC125, BC126, BC127 (west annex complex, variant of Type B).According to NMC records, a male fig-ure on Garuḍa (see Multzer o’Naghten 2014 for a possible identification), a four-armed seated Avalokiteśvara, and a Y ama on a buffalo from BC64 of the west group of the second enclosure. Presently at NMC- Ka. 1720 (B.362, B.73.2); Ka. 504 (B.162, B.115.1) and Ka. 86 (B.363, B.731.4).N1/17 from BC45 and N2/N18 from BC15, mentioning these two as fire shrines.
Wat Nokor Kompong Cham 85,00 2 (Type B)    
Bayon Siem Reap 474,00 Six: BY50, BY51, 
BY16, BY21 enclosure I, variant of Type B); BY53, BY54, enclo-sure III, Type C.At least two Navagraha friezes. One was found in 1937, while clearing the north side courtyard, and is presently kept at the Conservation depot, no. 11 (see EFEO CAM 02177). The second can still be seen in the North-west Commaile heap in situ. 
1. Timeline adopted after a lecture delivered by Claude Jacques at SOAS in May 2016.
07_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   288 11/2/22   3:46 PM

--- [Page 291] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu LinhChapter 8
Śaiva Religious Iconography:  
Dancing Śiva in Multi-Polity Medieval Campā1
As early as the 5 th century CE, Śaivism had 
risen to eminence on the Indian subconti-
nent as an established religious institution. 
Prosperous maritime trade routes between India 
and China brought Śaivism to the new lands of 
Southeast Asia, including Campā, a chain of small 
coastal polities that developed during the first mil-
lennium CE in present-day central and southern 
Vietnam. The name ‘Campapura’ first appeared 
in a local Cam inscription, the Mỹ Sơn Stele of 
Prak āśadharma (C. 96), which is dated to 6 58 CE.2 
A few years later, in the Khmer Kdei Ang inscrip-
tion (K. 53), the name ‘Campeśvara’ is mentioned 
as well (Cœdès and Parmentier 1923 : 46; Schwey-
er 2010 ). But Campā did not exist throughout its 
history under the same name, as it was referred to 
in several Chinese sources under different names 
such as Linyi 林邑  (Viet. Lâm Ấp) from 192  to 758 , 
Huanwangguo 環王國  (Viet. Hoàn Vương quốc) 
from 758 to 886  and Zhancheng 占城  (Viet. Chiêm 
Thành) from 886–1471  (Vickery 2011 : 369). In ad-
dition, if early French scholarship often described 
Campā as a unified kingdom, the last few decades 
have seen a wave of new studies concerning Campā 
not as a single entity, but as a multi-polity Cam 
‘network state’ comprised of five regions or princi-
palities located from North to South in present-day 
Vietnam: Indrapura, Amar āvatī, Vijaya, Kauthara, 
and P āṇḍuraṅga.3 Keith Taylor (1999 : 153) defined 
1. I thank professors Leslie C. Orr and Trần  Kỳ Phư ơng 
for their valuable comments and suggestions.
2. Here an
d below I refer to numbers of the EFEO inven -
tory of Campā inscriptions; for this particular stele, see 
Cœdès and Parmentier 1923: 22.
3. See, for instance, Po Dharma 2001. However, Hardy, Campā as ‘a generic term for the polities organized 
by Austronesian-speaking peoples along what is 
now the central coast of Vietnam’, while Vickery 
(2011 : 378) asserts that there was no single kingdom 
named ‘Campā’, and that the regions as distin-
guished in epigraphy corresponded to distinct ge-
ographical, and even rival, polities.4 This prompts 
the question as to what kind of political relation-
ships and connections there existed between dif-
ferent parts/regions of Campā, and whether these 
regions can be conceptualized as polities, states, 
or principalities. There are of course differences 
between these terms but for the time being, as my 
chapter focuses more on artistic rather than polit-
ical aspects, I will use these terms interchangeably. 
And for the sake of convenience, I will use the term 
Campā to include all Cam polities.
Modern reconstructions of the early history and 
religion of Campā rely mostly upon stone inscrip-
tions, archeological monuments, religious sculp -
tures, and a few texts from neighbouring countries 
such as the account found in the Chinese Sui shu 
隋書  (Book of the Sui [Dynasty]), Song Huiyao 
Jigao 宋會要積搞  (Draft of the Collected Statues 
Griffiths, and Wade (2019: 14) recently suggested that this 
model of Campā as a spatial organization of five territories 
is also obsolete and provided instead a new interpretation 
that emphasizes the centrality of river valleys in Campā’s 
political geography. 
4. Interestingly, based on epigraphical texts and sculptural 
steles asociated with the name Śrī Viṣṇ ujāti Vīra bhadra -
varmadeva dating between 1401/2 and 1443/4, Griffiths 
(2019: 193) refutes revisionist claims that Campā was never 
a unified kingdom and instead suggests that in the 15th 
century, Campā was a land of significant territorial extent 
ruled by a powerful king.
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   289 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 292] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh290
of the Song [Dynasty]), and the Da Ming shilu 
大明實錄  (Veritable Records of the Great Ming 
[Dynasty]).5 A survey of extant Cam inscriptions 
points to the primacy of Śiva worship at the royal 
courts of mediaeval Campā.6 The earliest Cam in-
dication of Śiva worship is the 5 th century CE Mỹ 
Sơn Stele Inscription of Bhadravarman I (C. 72), 
which documented land endowments that were 
dedicated to the benevolent Śiva (Bhadreśvara) by 
the king.7 This inscription reveals that by this time 
Śaivism was a mature, well-established practice in 
Campā, and that it received royal and elite patron-
age. Examining the Pāśupata elements in ancient 
Cambodia and Campā, Chemburkar and Kapoor 
(2018 : 47) argue that Bhadreśvara was also the state 
god of the Khmer at Sambor Prei Kuk and the Cam 
at Mỹ Sơn. 
As for religious iconography in Campā, depic-
tions of Śiva appeared in both anthropomorphic 
form and aniconic symbolic form (śivaliṅga). This 
chapter focuses only on the artistic representations 
of one of the anthropomorphic forms of Śiva, the 
nṛttamūrti or dancer. The reasons why I am inter-
ested in this specific form of Śiva are first because 
of the lingering effect of A.K. Coomaraswamy’s 
popularization of South Indian cult of Naṭarāja 
(lit. Dancing Lord), and second because Naṭarāja 
was promoted and deployed by Cōḻa queen Sem-
biyan Mahādev ī to become an international Cōḻa  
emblem from the 10 th century onward. The role 
played by religious iconography in the establish-
ment of political authority, such as in the case of 
Pallava8 or Cōḻa dynasties, inspired me to consider 
questions of how popular the dancing Śiva was in 
Campā, what were the political purposes behind 
adopting this representation, and what were the 
sources of transmission and diffusion of this em-
bodiment of Śiva. It should be stressed that not 
5. For a thorough study of these three Chinese accounts 
and th
eir mention of Campā, see Wade 2003, 2005; Shiro 
2011; and Aspell 2013. 
6. Accor
ding to Griffiths et al. (2012), the total number 
of inscriptions that had been found prior to 2010 was 233. 
They were written in Sanskrit and Old Cam, and dated 
mainly from the 7th to 15th centuries.
7. For a full translation of this inscription, see Majumdar 
(1985, Book III: 4) and Golzio (2004: 2).
8. See Gil
let 2010. all the images of dancing Śiva are Naṭarāja and 
that Naṭarāja was not the first sculptural form to 
illustrate Śiva dancing. Kaimal (1999 : 392–396 ) 
argues that Naṭarāja is the representation of Śiva 
in the ānanda-tāṇḍava (‘dance of furious bliss’) 
in which Śiva bends his right leg and lifts his left  
leg to waist height and crosses the hips, while one 
of his four arms crosses the body with its relaxed 
‘elephant hand’ gesture (gajahasta-mudrā) above 
the left ankle, and one of his hands makes the 
‘open-palm gesture’ (abhaya-mudrā). He has long 
matted tresses spread out from his head and among 
the locks is the personification of the goddess of 
Ganges river with her hands in a respectful gesture 
(añjali-mudrā). He also displays a crescent moon, a 
flower and a topknot, and he stands on a trampled 
dwarf. Kaimal suggests that early (i.e., pre-10 th 
century) dancing forms of Śiva usually had no lifted 
left leg crossing in front of the hips, and no drum 
or flames in their hands. She maintains that the 
Indian form of Naṭarāja is unique and emerges in 
both text and iconography from the beginning of 
the 10th century. In Campā we do not see this form 
of South Indian Naṭarāja discussed by Kaimal, and 
for this reason I will use the term ‘dancing Śiva’ 
instead of ‘Naṭarāja’ hereafter. 
The problem in undertaking this research is 
that there are no written records that mention how 
people worshipped the dancing Śiva or how exactly 
the Cam responded to this dancing figure.9 The 
treatment of these stone sculptures in their original 
temple locations remains unknown, as does the 
matter of how important this form of Śiva was in 
Campā. However, what we do know is that Cam 
dancing Śivas were commonly carved in stone and 
sculpted in the tympana placed above a temple’s 
main entrance door.10 The image of the deity that 
occupies this position usually indicates the main 
deity of the temple, or that the temple ‘belongs’ to 
9. While the bhakti  move ment became popular among 
the mass population in South India from the 8th century, 
we have no evidence of devotional worship following a 
kind of personal love relationship to particular deities in 
Campā.
10. See, for example, the dancing Śiva at the main entrance 
of the temple Po Klaong Girai (dated 12th–13th centuries) 
in Pāṇḍuraṅga (present-day Ninh Thuận) in Figs. 8.11–8.12.
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   290 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 293] ---
 Śaiva Religious Iconography291
that particular deity.11 The fact that Cam dancing 
Śiva were situated in this architectural position 
demonstrates the significance of this manifestation 
of Śiva. In India, dancing Śiva is carved in a circu-
lar niche set in the lower part of the tower, in the 
façade, and above the main entrances of temples, as 
for instance at Pattadakal (dated 7th–8th centuries) 
and at Bhubaneswar (dated 7th–8th centuries).12 
Modern scholars working on Campā have yet 
to explore this dancing Śiva in much detail, either 
geographically or temporally. Prominent scholars 
of Cam art have studied sculptures individually 
rather than comparatively. In this chapter, I present 
a comparative approach by examining ten Cam 
dancing Śiva sculptures found in the four main pol -
ities of Campā, viz. Indrapura, Amar āvatī, Vijaya, 
and P āṇḍuraṅga, and dated between the 8th and 
13th centuries.13 I argue that by examining all the 
extant statues of dancing Śiva in chronological 
order we can get a broader picture of the transmis-
sion of this icon and its influence on the religious 
art of this region, specifically the stylistic changes 
over time and, more generally, the degree to which 
Cam art was influenced by Indian and Khmer art. 
Importantly, as the following discussion will reveal, 
Indian iconography influenced Cam depictions of 
dancing Śiva in northern Campā, whereas Khmer 
artistic style left its imprint on dancing Śiva from 
southern Campā. Visual depictions of dancing 
Śiva from northern Campā (Indrapura, Amar ā-
vatī) often represent the deity with family members 
and attendants. By contrast, Khmer-influenced 
dancing Śiva from southern Campā (Vijaya and 
Pāṇḍuraṅga) depict the Hindu god dancing alone 
but with attributes. Interestingly, dancing Śiva 
from the early period (dated 8th to 10th centuries) 
11. Another way to find out who is the main deity in a 
temple that enshrines multiple deities is through examining 
the dvārapāla s, ‘the guardians of the door’. 
12. See figs
. 161–169 of Sivaramamurti 1974: 292 –295.
13. No scul
ptures of dancing Śiva were found in the Kau -
thara area, where the renowned temple Po Nagar devoted to 
the worship of the mother goddess Y ā Pu Nag ara is located. 
Schweyer (2004: 109–144) maintains that the cult of this 
female deity at Po Nagar in Nha Trang parallels the cult 
of the male deity Bhadre śvara at M
ỹ Sơn; Trần  and Naka-
mura (2008) share the same opinion. For a comprehensive 
and thorough study of this Mother goddess and Po Nagar 
temple, see Noseworthy 2015 and Nguyễn Thế  Anh 1995.were from northern Campā, whereas sculptures 
from the later period (dated 11 th to 13 th centu-
ries) were predominantly from the South. For the 
dating of sculptures, I rely on the scholarship of 
French pioneers H. Parmentier (1909 , 1918 ), P. 
Stern (1942 ), and J. Boisselier (1963 ), all affiliated 
with the École française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO). 
It was these scholars who first established the prac-
tice of naming the style of the sculptures after the 
names of monuments or places where they were 
discovered.
dancing śiva from northern campā 
(indrapura, amar āvatī)
Here I examine northern dancing Śivas from the 
early period (dated 8 th to 10 th centuries), which 
show strong connections with Indian iconograph-
ical elements, particularly through the representa-
tion of Śiva’s family (Pārvat ī and Skand
a), attend-
ants (dwarf Apasmāra and Nandin), Śiva’s dancing 
poses (chatura  or lalita with both knees bent), and 
multiple arms with hand gestures (abhaya-mudrā, 
gajahasta-mudrā). These elements are the most 
popular accompanying aspects in Indian depic -
tions of dancing Śiva. 
The first three Cam dancing Śiva sculptures 
under analysis are from the 8th century sites of 
Mỹ Sơn A1 and Mỹ Sơn C1 , Quảng Nam province, 
and the 9th century site of Bích La, Quảng Trị 
province (Figs. 8.1 , 8.2, and 8.3 ).14 I group these 
three sculptures together because they share many 
similar characteristics. Henri Parmentier was one 
of the first scholars who documented these three 
sculptures of dancing Śiva. In his assessment, 
Śiva from Mỹ Sơn A1 (Fig. 8.1 ) has twelve arms. 
14. Mỹ Sơn sanct uary is one of the earliest and most im -
portant religious centres of Campā. The second one in 
importance is the Po Nagar at Nha Trang as mentioned 
in the previous footnote. There were many temples built 
successively from the 5th to 14th centuries in the M ỹ Sơn 
sanctuary complex. For this reason, there are different 
name codes and dates for different temples within the 
sanctuary complex. Even though Campā was not a unitary 
kingdom, but rather a polity organized as a federation or 
confederation (Po Dharma 2001), Mỹ Sơn continued to hold 
its prominent position throughout the history of Camp ā.
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   291 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 294] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh292
Fig. 8.1: Dancing Śiva. M ỹ Sơn A1. (Drawing: 
Par
mentier 1909: 361)
Considerable damage to the sculpture, though, 
makes it impossible to precisely determine Śiva’s 
attributes. I do not know where this sculpture is 
currently located and have to depend solely on 
Parmentier’s drawing.15 Parmentier did not iden-
tify the figure under Śiva’s feet but stated it was a 
man who appeared to be suffering. He also men-
tioned that to Śiva’s right was a kneeling woman 
praying with a standing naked child covered with 
jewellery and with arms crossed (Parmentier 1909 : 
366). I suggest that the figure under Śiva’s foot is 
the dwarf Apasmāra, the woman is Śiva’s consort 
Pārvat ī, and the child is their son Skanda. What 
is of most interest in this tympanum is that the 
dwarf’s lower body and his left leg are supporting 
a pedestal carrying Pārvat ī and Skanda. This gives 
a sense of the function of the dwarf as a vāhana, a 
vehicle or a chariot that carries Śiva’s entire family. 
Parmentier (1909 : 360–361) identified the dancing 
figure on the left of Śiva as Bhṛ ṅgin; next to him is 
Gaṇeśa with his trunk raised toward Śiva; on each 
side and furthest from Śiva is a standing warrior 
with hands joined in devotional position.16 
15. Sivaramamurti (1974: 360) also discussed this Cam 
dancing Śiva sculpture and provided a photograph of the 
tympanum, however he did not mention if he took the 
photo himself and where the sculpture was located when 
the picture was taken. 
16. Discussing this sculpture, Sivaramamurti ( ibid.) states 
that the figure to the extreme left of Śiva is probably Indra. 
Fig. 8.2: Dancing Śiva. M ỹ Sơn C1. M ỹ Sơn Sanctu ary. 
(Photo: author) 
Sharing similar characteristics with the Mỹ Sơn 
dancing Śiva A1 is the Śiva Mỹ Sơn C1 (Fig. 8.2), 
which is currently preserved in Mỹ Sơn Sanctu -
ary. Parmentier states that this Śiva C1 is a larger 
version of Śiva A1 and it could be the model that 
inspired Śiva A1. He also suggests that this dancing 
Śiva seems to have ten arms and the missing hands 
were probably holding some attributes. Similar -
ly, as with Śiva A1, he did not identify the sitting 
woman and the naked child but suggested that the 
standing worshipper in a rich dress who has hands 
joined together might represent a founder king. On 
the right side of Śiva, Parmentier identified two 
musicians and a skinny character who, according 
to him, is Bhṛ ṅgin.17 Lastly, he mentions that on 
top and around the god, in the clouds, there are two 
or three apsarases holding lotus buds (Parmenti-
er 1909: 390–392). It is unfortunate that since the 
upper part of this tympanum is badly mutilated it 
is almost impossible to identify the flying celestial 
beings. However, upon examining this Mỹ Sơn C1 
dancing Śiva, Thierry Zéphir (2005: 188) contends 
that at the left of Śiva, on the upper part of the tym -
panum, is depicted the god Sūrya who is holding 
a lotus. The lotus is one of the attributes of Sūrya, 
and this probably led Zéphir to his suggestion. In 
17. According to Sivaramamurti ( ibid.: 3 61), the two mu -
sicians are Vaiśrava ṇa playi ng the ūrdhva  drum and Indra 
seated under a tree playing the flute. 
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   292 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 295] ---
 Śaiva Religious Iconography293
addition, examining this sculpture, Sivaramamurti 
(1974: 361) asserts that this image closely resembles 
Śiva dancing in chatura from Badami. 
The third sculpture in this group was found 
further north in Bích La of Quảng Trị province, 
where a dancing Śiva was also sculpted within a 
tympanum (Fig. 8.3). Śiva here has ten arms but the 
eight back arms were not very carefully carved, and 
are perhaps unfinished work. The hand gestures of 
the back arms are worn out and Parmentier (1909: 
532–533) suggested that some possible attributes 
might have been badly damaged by dampness. The 
main front arms are in the crossed position that is 
very typical of Indian dancing Śiva iconography. 
The figure on the left of Śiva could be Skanda, one 
of the two sons of Śiva, while the figure on his right 
is a worshipper. Śiva is wearing a long garment, 
a loose skirt that is quite different from shorter 
Indian garments that usually come with decorative 
jewellery (see Fig. 8.6). This long garment shows 
that even though the sculpture is clearly influenced 
by Indian religious iconography, it is still a product 
of Southeast Asian sculptors. 
All of the three statues of dancing Śiva from 
Mỹ Sơn A1 and C1, as well as the Bích La from 
Quảng Trị appear to be in the chatura pose, with 
the right foot placed on the demon Apasmāra or 
on a pedestal and the left foot resting on the toes. 
Indian depictions of Śiva dancing in chatura pose 
appeared as early as the 6th century CE in the art 
of the Vākāṭakas (250–500 CE, contemporaries of 
the Guptas but in the South), which can be seen in 
various caves at Ellora.18 Moreover, either Skanda 
or Ga ṇeśa appeared in all the sculptures. If the 
dancing Śiva from Mỹ Sơn A1 and Bích La have 
their arms crossed in exactly the same position, 
what Mỹ Sơn A1 and C1 have in common is the 
presence of Śiva’s consort Pārvat ī, as well as Śiva’s 
attendant Bhṛ ṅgin.19 It is unclear if Bhṛ ṅgin in 
Mỹ Sơn A1 was holding a ḍamaru, but in Mỹ Sơn 
18. See for instance figs. 11 and 70 of Śiva dancing in 
chatura  Ellora cave in Sivaramamurti 1974: 174, 219. Early 
Cōḻa depictions of Śiva in chatura  pose can be seen in the 
10th-century sculptures originating from Tiruvarangulam 
currently on exhibit at the National Museum in New Delhi, 
India.
19. For the m
yths on Bhṛ ṅgin dan
cing around Śiva, see 
Rao (1916 [1993], vol. 2: 138, 227, 323).C1 he is holding one. The ḍamaru is one of Śiva’s 
attributes which appeared quite early in Indian 
iconography. For example, a Gupta sculpture of a 
multi-armed Śiva dancing with one of his hands 
holding a ḍamaru can be seen in Sirpur, Chhat -
tisgarh.20 An emphasis on music is clearly shown 
in Mỹ Sơn C1 where musicians playing the flute 
and tambour are beautifully depicted. Examining 
Śaivism in the ancient Khmer and Cam domains, 
Chemburkar and Kapoor (2018: 52) suggest that 
the Mỹ Sơn C1 tympanum shows an offering of 
music to Śiva. Since the Mỹ Sơn inscriptions of 
Harivarman II mention an offering of dance and 
music to the god, this evidence of the musical 
instruments (flute, tambour, ḍamaru) led them 
to suggest that they represent the Kāpālika cult 
that emerged from the Pāśupata sect. It remains 
a challenging topic to trace the types of schools of 
Śaivism that were practised throughout the history 
of multi-polity Campā because of the lack of ev -
idence. However, it seems reasonable to suggest 
that the dancing Śiva from northern Campā were 
strongly influenced by Indian Śaiva religious art 
because of the representations of Śiva’s family 
members, attendants, his dancing poses, and mul-
tiple arms and hand gestures as they appeared in 
the above-mentioned sculptures (see Fig. 8.6 for 
an example of an Indian dancing Śiva). 
20. See fig. 9 of Sivaramamurti 1974: 172.
Fig. 8.3: Dancing Śiva. Bích La, Q uảng Tr ị. (Photo: 
T
rần Kỳ Phương) 
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   293 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 296] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh294
The next two statues of dancing Śiva to examine 
are from Lương Hậu village, Hương Thuỷ district 
of Huế city (Fig. 8.4 ), and from Phong Lệ, Đà Nẵng 
(Fig. 8.5); the main reason for grouping these two 
together is that both have sixteen arms and the 
arms are prominently depicted. In both of these 
sculptures, we do not see the members of Śiva’s 
family; instead, the emphasis is on his worshippers. 
The Śiva tympanum was discovered in Lương Hậu 
village and thus called Lương Hậu tympanum (Fig. 
8.4). This is the most recently discovered of the 
statues discussed here, as it was found a little over 
a decade ago. As far as I know, there are no publi-
cations on this sculpture in Western languages yet. 
The archeologist Lê Đình Phụng (2007 : 113–117 ) 
was the first scholar to publish information on this 
sculpture, which he dated to the 9 th to 10 th centu-
ries. However, the art historian Ngô Văn Doanh 
(2012 ) suggested that this dancing Śiva shares 
common characteristics with the 8th century Mỹ 
Sơn Śiva tympana A1 and C1 mentioned above 
and thus dated it to the 8th century. It was dis-
covered near the Bà Yàng shrine (the shrine of 
the ‘Heavenly Lady’), which is also known as Bà 
Chuẩn Đề (‘Lady of compassion, saviour, protector 
of Dharma’). After the discovery of this tympanum, 
local villagers brought it to the shrine and have 
worshipped it ever since as the main deity because 
they thought that she was the multi-armed Bud -
dhist bodhisattva Phật Bà Quan Âm (Guan-yin/
Avalokiteśvara). Śiva here has sixteen arms but 
holds no attributes at all; instead, the focus is on 
his hand gestures. Aside from his front right hand 
being in abhaya-mudrā (‘non-fear’ gesture) while 
his front left hand is in gajahasta-mudrā (‘ele-
phant hand’ gesture), all the right-hand gestures 
are symmetric with the left side. The two upper-
most hands seem to be holding something like a 
banded snake over his head. This is reminiscent 
of a 5 th century Gupta multi-armed Śiva dancing 
sculpture from Sirpur (see the image in Sivara-
mamurti 1974 : 172) whose topmost pair of hands 
holds up a snake while the two main front hands 
are in the gestures of abhaya-mudrā and gajahas-
ta-mudrā, the same as the Śiva from Lương Hậu. 
The only difference between the Indian’s Gupta 
dancing Śiva and the one from Lương Hậu lies in 
the attributes the Indian Śiva carries in other arms 
Fig. 8.4: Dancing Śiva, Shrine B à Y àng. H ương Thu ỷ, 
Huế. (Photo: 
Trần Kỳ Phương) 
such as the triśūla, ḍamaru, and kapāla. Indeed, it 
is from the Gupta period that representations of 
dancing Śiva in visual form became identifiable. In 
this Lương Hậu tympanum, Śiva is standing on a 
dwarf or the demon Apasmāra and, interestingly, 
the dwarf is looking straight at us. This is the only 
Cam representation of Śiva dancing on a dwarf 
that faces directly to the viewers. It is also very rare 
in India to have the dwarf placed in this position 
while supporting dancing Śiva. I was able to find 
only a few such cases, the first being the depiction 
of the 2 nd century BC–1 st century CE Gudimal -
lam liṅga (in southeastern Andhra Pradesh), which 
shows a merging of aniconic and anthropomorphic 
manifestations of Śiva, and the second being the 
9th-century CE Pallava bronze sculptures from 
Kuram, Nallur, and Kilakkadu in Tamil Nadu.21 
An Apasmāra under dancing Śiva’s foot is common 
in South Indian art, though the dwarf more often 
turns toward the left, and sometimes to the right, 
but rarely directly toward the viewers. Further-
more, in the Lương Hậu tympanum, there are two 
devoted worshippers, a male figure on Śiva’s right 
who looks more like a sage than an ordinary, and 
another male figure on his left who is most proba-
bly a devotee. None of Śiva’s family members nor 
his favourite attendant Bh ṛṅgin were depicted. 
21. For some illustrations, see Doniger 2009: 22–23; Si -
varamamurti 1974: 168–169, 204–206.
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   294 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 297] ---
 Śaiva Religious Iconography295
The dancing Śiva from Phong Lệ, Đà Nẵng  
(Fig. 8.5) is one of the best-carved and preserved 
Cam sculptures among all the depictions of dancing 
Śiva. There is a proportional balance between left  
and right and between the upper and lower parts 
of the sculpture. All the figures fit perfectly in the 
space of the arched form of the tympanum. The 
artist managed to bring out the overall harmony 
among all the figures in this sculpture in terms of 
the facial expressions of Śiva and his worshippers, 
and the techniques for proportional measurement 
of the statue. Śiva here is depicted with a crescent 
moon inserted in his headdress, one of his first 
identifying characteristics. Śiva has sixteen arms 
with all of the hands in identical gestures. Pierre 
Baptiste (2005: 237; 2018: 210–211) asserts that 
the hand gestures of the main arms, even though 
looking like vitarka-mudrā (hand gesture of argu-
mentation or discussion in which the tips of the 
thumb and the index finger touch while the other three fingers remain straight), are more likely the 
arālahasta (the hand gesture in which the index 
finger is bent and the thumb is held close to the 
palm, the tips do not necessary touch one another, 
and the three other fingers remain straight) de-
scribed in the dance manual Nāṭyaśāstra.22 In 
the upper part of the right main arm we see the 
serpent Śe ṣa that curls as his armband or bracelet 
ornament. There is a harpist and a drummer on 
each side of Śiva. There are also several floating 
22. Sivaramamurti (1974: 362) suggests that the hands of 
Śiva are in patāka signifying abhaya, the mudrā for ācamana 
(partaking of a small quantity of water). See Iyer 1998: 51 for 
a more detailed explanation of the arāla hand gesture. It 
remains unclear whether the Cam had access to any Sanskrit 
manuals on temple architecture and religious iconography 
such as the Śilpaśāstra and Nāṭyaśāstra. There is an ongoing 
debate on the transmission of knowledge that made it pos-
sible to create Hindu temples and sculptures in Southeast 
Asia. There were attempts to connect temple architecture 
and iconography to textual evidence and to claim that 
Southeast Asian architects might have received some texts 
from the Indian subcontinent and then built temples on the 
basis of prescriptions contained in the texts. But it remains 
unknown whether the builders and the sculptors were able 
to read the texts or they constantly needed an ācārya or a 
Brahmin to supervise them. Also, another problem is that 
there were temples that had been built before those manuals 
were actually produced or codified.worshippers looking as half-bird and half-human 
celestial figures on each side of Śiva; they are pre-
sented with their hands pressed together in the 
devotional position (añjali-mudrā) (Tingley 2009: 
222). Baptiste suggests that this tympanum shares 
similar characteristics with the art monuments of 
the Cāḷukyas at Badami, Karnataka, and especial-
ly the tympanum of dancing Śiva at the entrance 
of the Taraka Brahma temple in Alampur.23 The 
dancing Śiva here is in the lalita pose; in India 
we can see this type of dancing Śiva pose in a 
6th century depiction in Ellora cave (Fig. 8.6). In 
this Indian icon, dancing Śiva has eight arms and 
the main ones are in gajahasta-mudrā (‘elephant 
hand’) and āhūyavarada-mudrā (hand gesture 
of invitation and charity) carrying several of his 
typical attributes. On the right of Śiva are three 
musicians who play the ūrdhva drum, flute, and 
cymbal. Peeping out from behind Śiva’s right leg 
is a tall and skinny figure, most probably Bhṛ ṅgin. 
On the left side of Śiva is Dev ī holding the hand of 
baby Skanda watching her husband’s dance. These 
figures were adopted directly to the northern Cam 
dancing Śiva iconography while we do not see them 
in the southern Cam depictions of dancing Śiva 
(see below). 
The last two northern statues of Cam dancing 
Śiva are both from Khương Mỹ of Quảng Nam 
province (Figs. 8.7  and 8.8 ). They are dated to the 
23. See Baptiste 2005: 237–331, and note 2.
Fig. 8.5: Dancing Śiva. Phon g Lệ, Đà N ẵng. Đà N ẵng 
Mus
eum of Cham Sculpture. (Photo: author) 
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   295 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 298] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh296
Fig. 8.6: Dancing Śiva. Vākāṭaka, Ello ra. Aurangabad, Maharashtra, India. 
(Photo: author) 
Figs. 8.7–8.8: Dancing Śiva. Kh ương M ỹ, Qu ảng Nam. Đà N ẵng Mus eum of Cham Sculpture. (Photo: 
author) 
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   296 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 299] ---
 Śaiva Religious Iconography297
10th century CE and are currently exhibited in the 
Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture. The lower 
part of the dancing Śiva in Fig. 8.7  was totally 
broken; however, Fig. 8.8 gives us a sense of what 
the other sculpture would look like if the Nandin 
was still intact. In both tympana, the face of Śiva 
is unfortunately badly damaged and it is unclear 
what kind of attributes each deity was holding in 
his hands. In Fig. 8.7 , Śiva has twenty-eight arms; 
some of the hands are holding his typical attributes 
such as a rosary, a ball, a club, a disk, a vase; some 
others hold a rope while the topmost pair of hands 
holds up the snake. In both sculptures, Śiva holds 
a vīṇā (a stringed instrument) or a ṭuila (bar-zith-
er) and is twisting backwards showing both his 
torso and his lower back at once. Dancing Śiva on 
a bull with his two main hands holding a vīṇā was 
depicted in the Pāla period at Natghar in the Brah-
manbaria subdivision of Tippera and at Ranihati of 
Dacca in the 10 th century; however, in these images 
Śiva’s body is not twisted.24 The images of dancing 
Śiva twisting his back and hips can be seen in cave 
fourteen of Ellora and at the temple of Markand 
in Chanda district of Maharashtra.25 However, in 
the Indian examples, Śiva does not dance on a 
Nandin nor hold a vīṇā. Interestingly, Sivarama -
murti (1974 : 363) mentions that the Nandin from 
Khương Mỹ (Fig 8.8 ) has a large necklace of bells 
and this is usually seen in the case of Cāḷukyan bulls. 
Accordingly, it is reasonable to conjecture that the 
northern Cam could have adopted Indian icono -
graphical elements from Ellora art in depicting Śiva 
dancing. However, while examining dancing Śiva 
from Bengal, Ślączka (2015 : 133) suggests that Cam 
dancing Śiva from Khương Mỹ (Figs. 8.7  and 8.8 ) 
share some elements with the twelve-armed images 
from Bengal. In particular, the uppermost arms 
are raised with the hands clasped above the head, 
the second pair holds a snake, and the main pair 
of hands plays a vīṇā. She maintains that those el-
ements occur exclusively in Bengal, thus signifying 
that the Cam dancing Śiva was developed under 
24. See figs. 173, 174 in Sivaramamurti 1974: 299–300.
25. See the images in Sivaramamurti 1974: 218, 337. 
However, the dancing Śiva from the Markand temple is 
of the Paramāra tradition and dated to the 11th century,  
which is much later than the one from Ellora and also later 
than the ones from Kh ương M ỹ. the influence of Bengal art. Consequently, I suggest 
that the northern Cam might have received Indian 
iconographical influences from various sources 
through different periods of time, and that trans-
mission and adoption happened before the 10 th 
century. It is important to note that dancing Śiva 
did not appear in Khmer art until the 10 th century 
and this form of Śiva did not attract the Javanese at all. This leads to the idea that the northern Cam 
dancing Śiva received Indian iconography directly 
from India and not through the intermediaries of 
Khmer or Javanese art. 
Interestingly, depictions of dancing Śiva dated 
prior to the 10 th century all come from the north-
ern part of Campā and emphasize Śiva with family 
members, musicians, and attendants. This is in con -
trast to the dancing Śiva from the southern parts 
of Campā, as not only they are all dated to a later 
period, from the 12 th to the 13 th centuries, but 
they also have a different iconographical focus. For 
example, such Śivas were typically depicted alone 
or with only two worshippers on each side, the 
emphasis instead being on their hand gestures and 
attributes. 
dancing śiva from southern campā 
(vijaya and p āṇḍuraṅ
ga)
From the 10th to the 11th centuries, we do not see 
any dancing Śiva scu
lpture in any part of Camp ā. 
However, between the 12 th and 13 th centuries, a 
new representation of dancing Śiva was construct-
ed in the Mỹ Sơn sanctuary for the main temple 
of group H 1 (Fig. 8.9 ). This sculpture technically 
belongs to the North, but since it was sculpted in 
the later period and with strong influences from the 
Tháp Mẫm decorative art style further south, I think 
it would be more proper to group it together with 
the southern ones. According to Zéphir (2005 : 301), 
this tympanum used to be on the top of the main 
entrance at the East side. Looking very different 
from the other two tympana of Mỹ Sơn A1 and C1, 
this sculpture has neither Śiva family members nor 
Nandin or Bhṛ ṅgin. The tympanum was construct-
ed with three different pieces of sandstone rather 
than one piece like other tympana. The shape of 
the tympanum is round and large in the lower part 
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   297 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 300] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh298
of the base and slowly converges toward the top as 
a pointed arch. This is a new feature of tympana 
from this period onward. The main figure of Śiva 
is recognized by the typical rosary attribute and his 
sacred thread tied in the form of a snake. Here the 
act of dancing is shown by the bent thighs of the 
deity in chatura  position, the same as the other two 
statues of dancing Śiva found in Mỹ Sơn. Zéphir 
(2005 : 301) suggests that the two hands of Śiva 
pointing upwards is an innovation in Cam art in-
troduced at that time, since we do not see anything 
like this before the 12 th century; however, he finds 
this hand gesture to be obscure. Śiva here is stand-
ing on a lotus petal base with two makara s holding 
lotus buds on each side. The appearance of the two 
makara s is interesting as we do not see makara  in 
any other Cam dancing Śiva statues. Zéphir (ibid .) 
believes that the style of the makara s in this Mỹ Sơn 
H1 belongs to the Tháp Mẫm decorative art style 
of the 12 th and 13 th centuries and thus may reflect a link between Mỹ Sơn and southern Camp ā. In 
addition, he suggests that this icon shows a strong 
influence from Khmer art: in particular, the facial 
expression (the large mouth and the closed eyes) 
would be due to Khmer influence, as well as the 
garments, with the large earring and the large body 
features being very similar to the Khmer style of 
Bayon during the period from the 12 th and the 
13th centuries. This leads Zéphir to suggest that this 
sculpture may point to contacts between Cambodia 
and Campā during the reign of the Khmer King 
Jayavarman VII (c. 1181 –1220 ?) (ibid .). This idea 
of contact or mutual influence between Cambodia 
and Campā becomes more apparent when exam -
ining the next set of sculptures, also dated between 
the 12 th and the 13 th centuries. 
Further South, in Vijaya (present-day Bình 
Định province), there appeared a distinct type of 
dancing Śiva represented by a sculpture which was 
found in Tháp Mẫm in 1934  and is currently exhib-
ited in the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture 
(Fig. 8.10).26 Guillon (2001 : 142) speculated that 
this sculpture belonged to a group of four identical 
images, although he gave no details concerning the 
other three. He also suggested that these sculptures 
were intended to be attached to a wall rather than 
be part of a tympanum. Zéphir (2005 : 318–319 ; 
2018 : 250–251 ), however, asserts that this sculpture 
was separated from a set of three sculptures in the 
photo archive of the Guimet museum. He proposed 
that the sculpture could be a cornice of a princi -
pal shrine or an antefix. I saw an almost identical 
version of this Tháp Mẫm dancing Śiva sculpture in 
the National Museum of Vietnamese History in Hà 
Nội, but I do not know where the third one is and 
whether there were four of them, as Guillon claims. 
In this Tháp Mẫm sculpture, Śiva holds an axe or a 
lance in his right hand and a trident (triśūla) in his 
left hand. The trident is the most famous attribute 
of Śiva and in India the earliest depiction of the 
triśūla is from the period prior to the Gupta; it can 
be seen in coins of Maues and Gondophares and in 
the copper seal discovered at Sirkap (Sivaramamur -
26. Tháp Mẫm is the name of a Cam temple and it is also 
used 
to refer to the 12th to 13th centuries Cam art of this 
region. The Tháp Mẫm site is located to the north of the 
Cam citadel Chà Bàn of Vijaya polity, about 25 km to the 
north of modern-day Qui Nhơn.
Fig. 8.9: Dancing Śiva, M ỹ Sơn H1. M ỹ Sơn Sanctu ary. 
(Photo: Tr ần Kỳ Phương) 
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   298 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 301] ---
 Śaiva Religious Iconography299
ti 1947 : 168). Interestingly, even though the triśūla 
is the most typical attribute of Śiva, it was only from 
this period and from the southern part of Camp ā 
that we find it depicted with dancing Cam Śiva. In 
the Tháp Mẫm sculpture, other typical attributes 
of Śiva are also present, such as a crescent moon 
inserted into his headdress and a third eye decorat-
ing his forehead. It is intriguing that the three most 
important of Śiva’s attributes were all represented in this sculpture while they were not adopted and 
presented in the images of dancing Śiva before the 
10th century in the northern parts of Camp ā. In the 
Tháp Mẫm dancing Śiva, the two rear arms of Śiva 
are held up and the hands linked together above 
the head. Zéphir (2005 : 318–319 ) suggests that this 
could be añjali-mudrā (‘gesture of worshiping’) 
or naivedya-mudrā (‘gesture of offering nutrition’, 
either concrete or spiritual). He adds that if this is 
a depiction of Śiva in naivedya-mudrā then it may 
suggest that Śiva here is in an offering position to 
the principal deity. But one can wonder who this deity may be that such a powerful god as Śiva could 
be venerating. 
In researching Cam-Khmer interactions, Peter 
Sharrock (2018 : 111) stated that the period of the 
early 12th to early 13 th centuries saw ‘a succession 
of friendships, and military, economic and cul -
tural alliances.’ He explains that the Khmer King 
Sūryavarman II (1113 –1149  CE) helped the Cam to 
fight against Đại Việt to recover their lands during 
the 1120 s and that, after the Chinese Song empire 
opened up foreign trade by sea, the Cam and Khmer 
became closer allies by developing the Thị Nại port 
in Vijaya. This alliance can be seen in the growth in 
trade and the visible Khmer influence in architec-ture and statuary in southern Camp
ā. Particularly, 
Sharrock (ibid.: 116) suggests that the evidence of 
Khmer influence on Cam temple art and statuary 
can be seen in the Tháp Mẫm style, especially the 
high reliefs of dancers and the Garuḍa decorative 
motifs. The dancing Śiva from Tháp Mẫm also 
attests to Khmer influence in religious art, for in-
stance the detailed decorations of heavy jewellery. 
Actually, prior to the 10 th century, there is only a 
single anthropomorphic image of Śiva in any form 
in all of Khmer art (James 2011 : 199). However, 
from the 10 th to 13 th centuries, there were quite a 
number of tympana of Khmer dancing Śiva, such as 
those from Phnom Rung, Banteay Samre, Banteay 
Srei, Phnom Chisor, and Phimai.27 In Camp ā, no 
dancing Śiva has been dated to around the 11 th 
century; they appeared only in the 12 th to 13 th 
centuries, when the southern Cam of Vijaya were 
in close contact with the Khmer. 
In the statue of dancing Śiva from Tháp Mẫm 
(Fig. 8.10), the forward fold of the sampot hanging 
freely between Śiva’s legs enhances the image of 
dance movement. This fold of cloth appears again 
in the tympanum of dancing Śiva at Po Klaong 
Girai temple in P āṇḍuraṅga in present-day Ninh 
Thuận province (Figs. 8.11  and 8.12 ). This is the 
last dancing Śiva sculpture I examine here. This 
pointed tympanum from the 12 th to 13 th centuries 
is currently mounted facing East above the main 
door of the main shrine of Po Klaong Girai temple 
complex. One can recognize the figure of Śiva 
27. See the images in James 2011 and Sivaramamurti 1974: 
354–357. 
Fig. 8.10: Dancing Śiva, Tháp Mẫm, Bìn h Định. Đà 
Nẵng Mus
eum of Cham Sculpture. (Photo: author) 
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   299 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 302] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh300
because his sacred thread and third eye are clearly 
depicted. He has six arms, four of which hold at-
tributes such as a lotus bud, a bow, a triśūla, and 
a sword (khaḍga). The two rear arms are held up 
with the two hands linked together above the head, 
exactly as in the sculpture of the dancing Śiva from 
Tháp Mẫm.28 This hand gesture is not, however, 
known in any Khmer statue of Śiva. If Śiva is in 
naivedya-mudrā, as Zéphir suggests, it implies 
a deity superior to Śiva. However, I believe that 
the principal deity of this temple was Śiva himself, 
represented in his symbolic form—as a Śivaliṅga, 
which remains in situ in the main sanctuary of the 
temple.29 Śiva here is in lalita dancing pose and the 
28. Sivaramamurti ( 1974 : 36 4) describes the topmost 
pair of hands raised over his head for simply for clapping 
and not in añjali-mudrā  (‘gesture of worshiping’) or na -
ivedya-mudrā  (‘gesture of offering nutrition’). 
29. This liṅga is c urrently covered with a paper case 
(liṅgako śa or mukh akośa) creat ed by contemporary Cam 
to represent the legendary King Po Klaong Girai. This king dynamism of movement is stressed by the cloth 
between his legs and the two ends of a scarf floating 
out on each side of the figure. This hanging cloth 
between Śiva’s legs looks almost the same as that 
of the dancing Śiva from Tháp Mẫm, suggesting a 
connection between these two Cam polities. Other 
elements such as heavy necklace jewellery, high 
hair cover, and detailed skirt decorations portrayed 
in dancing Śiva from both Vijaya and P āṇḍuraṅga 
also point to the idea of a mutual artistic influence 
between the two Cam polities. 
Indeed, the Khmer 
were present not only in Vijaya; S ūryavarman’s 
nephew Jaya Harivarman (also known as Prince 
Śivānanda) and his father stayed in P āṇḍuraṅga, 
as did S ūryavarman’s reputed general (sen āpati) 
Śankara (Sharrock 2018 : 116). This could explain 
why the representation of dancing Śiva in Po 
is currently worshipped by the Cam as the main deity of 
the temple instead of Śiva. As for the topic of mediaeval 
Śaiva ri
tual and the practice of liṅgako śa and mu
khako śa, 
see Bha
ttacharya 1966 and Guy 2018: 89–96.
Figs. 8.11–8.12: Dancing Śiva, Po Klao ng Girai temple, Ninh Thu ận. (Phot o: author)
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   300 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 303] ---
 Śaiva Religious Iconography301
Klaong Girai temple shares common features with 
the dancing Śiva from Tháp Mẫm, as both these 
Cam polities might have received influences from 
Khmer art. And this could explain why southern 
dancing Śivas look quite different from the north-
ern ones, especially insofar that in the southern 
images, the statues of Śiva are not accompanied 
by images of his family members or attendants but 
there is a greater emphasis on the deity’s attributes 
with two back hands linked above his head. 
conclusion 
Dancing Śiva was visualized and iconographically 
represented in Camp ā as early as the 8th century 
and continued to hold an important place in Cam 
religious art up until the 13 th century. Interesting-
ly, the dancing Śiva dated between the 8th and 10 th 
centuries were all found in the northern regions 
of Campā (Indrapura, Amar āvatī), while the 
sculptures from the later period, between the 12 th 
to 13th centuries, came mainly from the southern 
part (Vijaya, and P āṇḍuraṅga), except the dancing 
Śiva from Mỹ Sơn H1 , which is a special case (it 
was found in Mỹ Sơn but bears strong similarities 
with the Tháp Mẫm decorative art style). Dancing 
Śivas found in the North were portrayed very often 
with his family members such as Pārvat ī, Gaṇeśa 
and Skanda, as well as with his attendants Bhṛ ṅgin, 
Nandin, and the dwarf Apasmāra. These charac -
ters were adopted directly from Indian iconogra-
phy. In addition, the crossed arms position and 
the dancing poses seem to be influenced by Indian 
Śaiva iconography of dancing Śiva. However, in 
the statues of dancing Śiva from the South, we do 
not see the portrayal of Śiva’s family members nor 
his attendants Bhṛ ṅgin, Nandin, and the dwarf 
Apasmāra. Instead, attributes of Śiva such as the 
trident (śūla or triśūla), a club (khaṭvā ṅga), a 
rosary, and an axe were depicted. These attributes 
were not main features of the 8th to 10 th centu-
ries sculptures found in the northern regions of 
Campā even though they had Indian antecedents. 
It is clear that the Cam selectively appropriated a 
number of Śaiva religious art features from various 
sources. One can ask why the northern Cam were 
not interested in those attributes of Śiva that were 
of the utmost importance. Śaivism was clearly a dominant religion of various Cam polities, but on 
the basis of this preliminary survey of the dancing 
Śiva iconographical representation it seems rea -
sonable to suggest that perhaps the form of Śaivism 
that was practiced in the northern part of Camp ā 
could have undergone modifications in the South-
ern part. After all, Camp ā never existed as a single 
entity and thus different varieties of Śaivism could 
have been practised more or less independently in 
different parts of Camp ā. 
For the time being, it is important to note that 
dancing Śiva was not a common element within 
Khmer religious art prior to the 10 th century and 
in fact there was only a single Khmer anthropo-
morphic image of Śiva in any form prior to the 
9th century. In insular Southeast Asia, images 
of dancing Śiva were not adopted and the only 
example of a dancing deity tentatively identified as 
Śiva can be seen is the dancing figures on the walls 
of Candi Śiva at the Prambanan temple complex 
in Central Java, dating from the 9 th century, but 
this is still a hypothesis and needs further research 
before it can be definitely confirmed (Iyer 1998 ). 
Thus, the 8th-century dancing Śiva tympana from 
Camp ā, of Lương Hậu, and Mỹ Sơn (A1 and C1
) 
may be regarded as the earliest depictions of the 
dancing Śiva in Southeast Asia. In the light of this 
fact, I suggest that Camp ā might have received a 
direct early transmission of religious art from India 
to its northern regions. Furthermore, on account of 
the close political and trading connections between 
southern Camp ā and the Khmer kings in the 12 th 
to 13th centuries, and of the elements of Khmer 
decorative motifs seen in dancing Śiva from Tháp 
Mẫm and Po Klaong Girai, I would suggest that 
Camp ā might have also received Khmer art influ-
ence during this period. In short, at this stage it is 
possible to speculate that in the early period, from 
the 8 th to 10 th centuries, Northern Camp ā seems 
to be influenced by Indian iconography through 
a direct transmission while from the 12th century 
onwards the presence of Khmer religious art influ-
ences and connections can be seen in the Cam art of Vijaya and P
āṇḍuraṅga. 
What is important to stress here is that the 
Cam did not simply copy and reproduce the reli-
gious art elements they received from Indian and 
Khmer sources, but rather adapted them and ex -
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   301 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 304] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh302
pressed new forms based on their own concepts. 
For instance, the uppermost hands interlocked 
and joined above Śiva’s head are a feature unique 
to southern Camp ā, which is especially strongly 
present in Cam art from the 12 th century in Vijaya 
and P āṇḍuraṅga, even though the exact meaning of 
this hand gesture as intended by the Cam remains 
unclear. The extant sculptures of dancing Śiva 
from Indrapura and Amar āvatī in the north of 
Camp ā did not employ this type of hand gesture, 
nor can this element be found in the religious art 
of Southeast Asia outside of Camp ā, thereby sug-
gesting a local interest. In addition, most of the 
Cam statues of dancing Śiva were depicted in the 
form of tympana that were intended to be placed 
at the main entrances of temples. This is the second 
most prominent position in a temple, second only 
to the central sanctuary icon. To have a dancing 
Śiva placed above the main entrance signifies that 
the temple belongs to Śiva as the central deity. Śiva 
has many manifestations and the fact that this man -
ifestation was selected to be represented on the 
tympanum suggests that the Cam were especially 
attracted to this form of Śiva. 
References
Aspell, William. 2013. ‘Southeast Asia in the Suishu: 
A Translation of Memoire 47 with Notes and 
Commentary’, Asia Research Institute Working 
Paper Series No. 208: 3–33. Singapore: ARI, Na-
tional University of Singapore. 
Baptiste, Pierre. 2005. ‘Les piédestaux et les sou -
bassements dans l’art cham hindou: une spé-
cificité?’, in Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir 
(eds.), Trésors d’art du Vietnam. La sculpture 
du Champa Ve-XVe siècles, pp. 109–121. Paris: 
Réunion des musées nationaux and Musée des 
arts asiatiques-Guimet.
. 2018. ‘Pediment of Dancing Siva’, in Trần 
Kỳ Phương, V. Văn Thắng, and Peter D. Shar -
rock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces of 
the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture, pp. 
210–211. Bangkok: River Books. 
Baptiste, Pierre and Thierry Zéphir (eds.). 2005. 
Trésors d’art du Vietnam. La sculpture du 
Champa Ve-XVe siècles. Paris: Réunion 
des musées nationaux and Musée des arts 
asiatiques-Guimet.Bhattacharya, Kamaleswar. 1966. ‘Li ṅga-Kośa’, 
Artibus Asiae, Supplementum 23: 6–13.
Boisselier, Jean. 1963. La statuaire du Champa: Re-
cherches sur les cultes et l’iconographie. Paris: 
École française d’Extrême-Orient. 
Chemburkar, Swati and Shivani Kapoor. 2018. ‘The 
Pāśupata sect in Ancient Cambodia and Champa’, 
in Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn Thắng, and Peter D. 
Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces 
of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture,  
pp. 45–56. Bangkok: River Books. 
Cœdès, George and Henri Parmentier. 1923. Listes 
Générales des inscriptions et des monuments du 
Champa et du Cambodge. Hanoi: Imprimerie 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Coral Remusat, Gilberte de. 1934. ‘Art Cam, le 
problème de la chronologie’, in P. Dupont et 
al. (eds.), Musée Guimet: Catalogue des collec-
tions indochinoises, pp. 35–44. Paris: Musée 
Nationaux. 
Davis, Richard H. 2017. ‘Śiva’s Multiplicity of 
Presence in Aniconic and Iconic Form’, Religion  
47/3: 459–482. 
Doniger, Wendy. 2009. The Hindus: An Alternative 
History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gillet, Valérie. 2010. La création d'une iconographie 
śivaïte narrative: incarnations du dieu dans les 
temples pallava construits. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient. 
Golzio, Karl-Heinz. 2004. Inscription of Camp ā. 
Berlin: Shaker Verlag. 
Griffiths, Arlo. 2019. ‘Epigraphical Texts and 
Sculptural Steles Produced under the Vīrab -
hadravarmadevas of 15th-Century Camp ā’, in 
Arlo Griffiths, Andrew Hardy, and Geoff Wade 
(eds.), Champa: Territories and Networks of a 
Southeast Asian Kingdom, pp. 193–220. Paris: 
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Griffiths, Arlo, Amandine Lepoutre, William A. 
Southworth, and Thành Phần. 2012. The In -
scriptions of Campa at the Museum of Cham 
Sculpture in Đà Nẵng. HCM: VNU-HCM Pub-
lishing House. 
Griffiths, Arlo, Andrew Hardy, and Geoff Wade 
(eds.). 2019. ‘Preface: Frameworks of Champa 
History’, in Arlo Griffiths, Andrew Hardy, 
and Geoff Wade (eds.), Champa: Territories 
and Networks of a Southeast Asian Kingdom,  
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   302 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 305] ---
 Śaiva Religious Iconography303
pp. 13–20. Paris: École française d’Extrême-  
Orient.
Guillon, Emmanuel. 2001. Cham Art: Treasures 
from the Da Nang Museum, Vietnam. Bangkok: 
River Books. 
Guy, John. 2014. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist 
Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia. New York: 
Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Guy, John. 2018. ‘Śaiva Ritual: li ṅgakośa and mukha -
kośa in Champa’, in Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn 
Thắng, and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy 
in Stone: Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum 
of Cham Sculpture, pp. 89–96. Bangkok: River 
Books.
Hall, Kenneth R. 2018. ‘Champa Ports-of-Trade 
Networking on the Coastline, ca. 300–1500 CE’, 
in Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn Thắng, and Peter  
D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: Master-
pieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculp-
ture, pp. 19–30. Bangkok: River Books. 
Iyer, Alessandra. 1998. Prambanan: Sculpture and 
Dance in Ancient Java. Thailand: White Lotus 
Press. 
. 2000. ‘Śiva’s Dance: Iconography and 
Dance Practice in South and Southeast Asia’, 
Music in Art 25/1–2: 25–32. 
James, Soumya. 2011. The Symbiosis of Image, 
Monument and Landscape: A Study of Select 
Goddess Images at Prasat Kravan, Kbal Spean 
and Banteay Srei in Cambodia. PhD dissertation, 
Cornell University.
. 2014. ‘Durga and Śiva at Banteay Srei: Blur -
ring Boundaries between Monument, Images 
and Practice’, in Upinder Singh and Parul (eds.), 
Asian Encounters: Exploring Connected Histories , 
pp. 137–158. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kaimal, Padma. 1999. ‘Shiva Nataraja: Shifting 
Meanings of an Icon’, The Art Bulletin 81/3: 
390–419.
. 2000. ‘The Problem of Portraiture in South 
India, circa 970–1000 A.D.’, Artibus Asiae 60/1: 
139–179. 
. 2011. ‘Shiva Nataraja: Multiple Meanings 
of an Icon’, in Rebecca M. Brown and Deborah 
S. Hutton (eds.), A Companion to Asian Art and 
Architecture, pp. 390–419. Chichester, West 
Sussex; Maiden, MA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.Lê Đình Phụng. 2007. Văn Hoá Champa ở Thừa 
Thiên Huế. Hà Nội: Nxb. Văn Hoá-Thông Tin 
và Viện Văn hoá. 
Majumdar, R.C. 1985. Champa History & Culture 
of an Indian Colonial Kingdom in the Far East 
2nd–16th Century A.D. Delhi: Gian Publishing 
House. [Reprint; first edition 1927]
Ngô Văn Doanh. 2012. ‘Lương Hậu sculpture and 
Dancing Shiva in Cham art’. A paper delivered 
at the International Conference on Cham Civ-
ilization, Đà Nẵng, 26–27 June 2012.
Nguyễn Thế Anh. 1995. ‘The Vietnamization of the 
Cham deity Po Nagar’, Asia Journal 2/1: 55–67.
Noseworthy, William. 2015. ‘The Mother Goddess 
of Champa: Po Ina Nagar’, Suvannabhumi: 
Multi-Disciplinary Journal of Southeast Asian 
Studies 7/1: 107–137.
Parmentier, Henri. 1909. Inventaire descriptif des 
monuments cams de l’Annam. Publications 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient. Paris: 
Leroux. 
. 1918. Inventaire Descriptif des Monuments 
Cams de l’Annam. Tome II . Paris: Leroux. 
Po Dharma. 2001. ‘The History of Champa’, in 
Emmanuel Guillon (ed.), Cham Art: Treasures 
from the Da Nang Museum, Vietnam , pp. 14–27. 
Bangkok: River Books. 
Rao, T.A. Gopinatha. 1916. Elements of Hindu Ico -
nography , vol. 2, pt. 1. Madras: The Law Printing 
House. [Reprints of 1971, 1993, New Delhi]
Schweyer, Anne-Valérie. 2004. ‘Po Nagar de Nha 
Trang (Part 1)’, Aséanie  14: 109–140.
. 2005. ‘Po Nagar de Nha Trang (Part 2)’, 
Aséanie  15: 87–119. 
. 2010. ‘The Birth of Champa: Crossing 
Borders in Southeast Asian Archaeology’. [A 
conference paper available online at https://
halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-00828812/
document]
Sharrock, Peter D. 2018. ‘Cham-Khmer interac -
tions 1113–1220 CE’, in Trần Kỳ Phương, V. Văn 
Thắng, and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy 
in Stone: Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum 
of Cham Sculpture, pp. 111–119. Bangkok: River 
Books.
Shiro, Momoki. 2011. ‘“Mandala Champa” seen 
from Chinese Sources’, in Trần Kỳ Phương  
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   303 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 306] ---
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh304
and Bruce M. Lockhart (eds.), The Cham of  
Vietnam: History, Society and Art , pp. 120–137. 
Singapore: NUS Press.
Sivaramamurti, C. 1974. Naṭarāja in Art, Thought, 
and Literature. New Delhi: National Museum. 
Ślączka, Anna. 2015. ‘Dancing Śiva Images from 
Bengal’, in Mokammal H. Bhuiyan (ed.), Studies 
in South Asian Heritage: Essays in Memory of M 
Harunur Rashid, pp. 125–155. Dhaka: Bangala 
Academy. 
Stern, Philippe. 1942. L’art du Champa (ancien 
Annam) et son évolution. Toulouse and Paris: 
Les Frères Douladoure and Adrien-Maison -
neuve. 
Taylor, Keith. 1999. ‘The Early Kingdoms’, in The 
Cambridge History of Southeast Asia: Vol. 1, 
Pt. 1 (From Early Times to c. 1500), pp. 137–182. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Tingley, Nancy. 2009. Arts of Ancient Vietnam: 
From River Plain to Open Sea. Houston: The 
Museum of Fine Arts. 
Trần Kỳ Phương and Bruce M. Lockhart (eds.). 2011. 
The Cham of Vietnam: History, Society and Art. 
Singapore: NUS Press
Trần Kỳ Phương and Rie Nakamura. 2008. ‘The Mỹ 
Sơn and Pô Nagar Nha Trang Sanctuaries: On 
the Cosmological Dualist Cult of the Champa Kingdom in Central Vietnam as seen from Art 
and Anthropology’, Asia Research Institute 
Working Paper Series No. 100. Singapore: ARI, 
National University of Singapore. 
Vickery, Michael. 2011. ‘Champa Revised’, in Trần 
Kỳ Phương and Bruce M. Lockhart (eds.), The 
Cham of Vietnam: History, Society and Art,  
pp. 363–420. Singapore: NUS Press.
Wade, Geoffrey. 2003. ‘The Ming shi Account of 
Champa’, Asia Research Institute  Working Paper 
Series No. 3. Singapore: ARI, National Univer-
sity of Singapore. 
. 2005. ‘Champa in the Song hui-yao: A draft 
translation’, Asia Research Institute Working 
Paper Series No. 53. Singapore: ARI, National 
University of Singapore. 
Zéphir, Thierry. 2005. ‘Introduction à la Sculp -
ture du Champa Ancien’, in Pierre Baptiste 
and Thie
rry Zéphir (eds.), Trésors d’art du 
Vietnam: la sculpture du Champa, Ve–XVe 
siècles . pp. 123–131. Paris: Musée national des 
arts asiatiques-Guimet. 
. 2018. ‘The Sculpture of Champa: Specific-
ity & Evolution’, in Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn 
Thắng, and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy 
in Stone: Masterpieces of the Da Nang Museum 
of Cham Sculpture, pp. 65–70. Bangkok: River 
Books. 
08_CreSouthV1_5P_28Jan22.indd   304 28/1/22   7:44 PM

--- [Page 307] ---
1 
introduction
The polities of Campā along the coast of 
central Vietnam were not politically united, 
but the Cams appear to have participat -
ed in temple and courtly culture, as can be seen 
through their inscriptions and image making. A 
16th-century Spanish account of the customs in 
Campā mentions at least five courtly festivals held 
annually by the Cam king, including feasts, plays, 
public races, and celebrations of elephant and tiger 
hunts (Souza and Turley 2016 : 677–680 ). In addi -
tion, Chinese histories describe the Cam kings per -
forming public processions with elephants, parasols, 
drums, and conches. These observations indicate 
a public display suggesting that the Cam polities 
shared political and cultural expression of power 
and religion.2 This chapter explores the extent to 
which the Cams incorporated themselves into the 
international political and economic sphere in the 
9th–10 th centuries by projecting onto their artistic 
1. I am indebted to research carried out by the late Julie 
Romain in her 2015 dissertation, ‘Courtly Culture and 
Visual Art in India: Rāmāyaṇa  Reliefs on Hindu Temples 
of the Sixth to Eighth Century’. She also offered advice and 
encouragement from the first time I met her in 2011 and 
throughout my graduate studies at UCLA in 2012–2017. In 
her dissertation, she argues that the R āmāyaṇa  rel iefs in 
Hindu temples reflected ‘secular, courtly culture’, and that 
the images of Rāma emphasize an honorific function, and 
highlight his role as a courtly hero. I thank Robert L. Brown, 
Peter Sharrock, and Andrea Acri for their comments on 
earlier versions of this chapter. In addition, two anony -
mous peer reviewers also provided helpful suggestions for 
revision.
2. Cefu yu
angui , 959.11288; Taiping yulan (Encyclopedia 
Assembled for Imperial Inspection during the Taiping Era) 
(983; Taibei: Shangwu yinshuguan, 1980), 786.3611.productions a complex and creative military and 
courtly culture. 
One of the most well-known sacred epics in 
South and Southeast Asia is the Rāmāyaṇa, the life 
story of Rāma, an avatar of Viṣṇu. Using textual 
sources, visual evidence, and recent scholarship, 
this chapter analyses the colossal Trà Kiệu pedestal 
within the context of the Rāmāyaṇa in Khmer and 
Javanese cultures during the 9th–10 th centuries. 
Visual evidence includes the Rāmāyaṇa sandstone 
reliefs preserved at the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cam 
Sculpture and imagery from three central Vietnam 
archaeological sites: Khương Mỹ, Chiên Đàn, and 
Chánh Lộ. The visual evidence shows three shared 
iconographic elements: archers with bows, archi -
tectural features, and dancing apsaras es found in 
Campā, East Java, and Cambodia. I suggest that 
the Rāmāyaṇa reliefs reveal that the Trà Kiệu 
pedestal found in a temple context also promoted 
courtly culture with close relationships to the art 
and cultures of Cambodia, East Java, and China in 
the 9th–10 th centuries. I define courtly culture as 
comprising ceremonial, celebratory, and martial 
activities with an emphasis on symbols of power, 
hierarchy, and etiquette for political motivations. 
Within the sacred sphere, the stone Trà Kiệu ped-
estal also commemorates royal-divine interactions 
through the narrative of the Rāmāyaṇa.3 
3. Peter Sharrock importantly notes that stone was 
normally a material reserved only for the gods (personal 
communication, 2019). In addition to religious motives, I 
suggest that the 10th-century Trà Kiệu pedestal’s imagery 
has political implications as well. The royal court was also 
seen through the lens of the sacred.Chapter 9
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā  
and its Relationship to Courtly Culture in  
Cambodia, East Java, and China1
mya chau
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   305 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 308] ---
Mya Chau306
history of the trà kiệu pedestal
The colossal Trà Kiệu pedestal and the liṅga-yoni  
were discovered in the 19 th century in Trà Kiệu 
village of Quảng Nam province in central Vietnam. 
The objects probably originated from point B 
in Trà Kiệu beside the main sanctuary, but not 
having been scientifically excavated, the original 
archaeological context of the pieces is unknown 
(Fig. 9.1).4 Early photographs of the Trà Kiệu ped-
estal suggest that it was once topped by a liṅga  
and thus focused on the worship of Śiva, but it is 
4. The earliest record which documents the Trà Kiệu ped -
estal’s transfer to Tourane is by E.L. Lajonquière (1901).possible that other deities were instead the objects 
of devotion. The first images of the Trà Kiệu ped-
estal were published in 1894 by French Resident 
Charles Lemire in an excursion report to Tourane, 
now modern-day Đà Nẵng, Vietnam. We do not 
know what sculptures were originally placed on 
the pedestal. During the colonial period, several 
different icons were displayed on the pedestal due 
to archaeological and curatorial considerations.5 
For example, Lemire’s report shows a statue of a 
5. Regardless of the reasons behind the arrangement, local 
and foreign visitors still continue to pray to and worship 
Cam objects in the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture.
Fig. 9.1: Plan of Trà Kiệu, Campā.
© JY Claeys, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 27, 1927, Pl. XXXVIII
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   306 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 309] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā307
female goddess seated on the Trà Kiệu pedestal 
(Lemire 1894 : 402).6 French archaeologists erected 
a monumental liṅga-yoni on top of the pedestal 
in the Tourane outdoor garden in a modern ar-
rangement in the 1930s . The decorated yoni with 
doubled lotus petals was placed on a separate base. 
In a third instance, the doubled lotus petals yoni  
was not paired with the liṅga, but with a sandstone 
sculpture of an elephant. 
The Trà Kiệu pedestal with the liṅga-yo-
ni remains displayed as a unit in the Đà Nẵng 
Museum o
f Cham Sculpture and documented 
by photographs in various publications (Fig. 9.2 ). 
Photographs link the Trà Kiệu pedestal and the 
liṅga-yoni as one entire structure, often referred 
to as an altar-pedestal, or simply a ‘pedestal’ . The 
6. This statue may be identified as the goddess Lakṣmī  
who is represented seated with her legs crossed and hands 
resting on both of her thighs. However, Lakṣmī  is often 
flanked by two elephants which are not represented here, 
suggesting that she might also be a local Cam goddess.term pedestal is used for the four largest extant 
Cam stone artefacts,7 including the Trà Kiệu struc-
ture. Scholars assume that these constructions 
were intended to support some sacred object or 
multiple objects placed on top of the structure, as 
a seat of the divine, or as an offering pedestal (pīṭha 
or balipīṭha , Tingley 2009 : 106). A second type of 
object, of which Cam art has many examples, is a 
base with spouts for funneling off sanctified liquids 
used to anoint the object they support. I use the 
term yoni for these objects, although they do not 
always support only liṅgas or spouts . The Trà Kiệu 
pedestal must be studied independently from the 
liṅga-yoni because we have no evidence that the 
two objects were created to be displayed as a unit.
We now consider whether the narrative scenes 
on the pedestal indicate its original purpose. Schol-
ars have proposed a variety of interpretation re -
7. The four large Cam structures referred to as pedestals 
were found in the archaeological sites of Mỹ Sơn, Trà Kiệu, 
Đồng Duơng, and Vân Trạch Hòa.Fig. 9.2: Trà Kiệu Pedestal, Campā, 10th century.
© Doktor Max, CC0 1.0
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   307 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 310] ---
Mya Chau308
garding the narrative scenes and the identity of 
the characters carved on the four sides of the Trà 
Kiệu pedestal (Fig. 9.3 ). All of the theories try to 
connect the scenes to a narrative of a myth or a 
text. For example, Jean Przyluski (1929 ) suggested 
that the pedestal depicts the legend of Kauṇḍinya, 
the mythical king of Funan. George Cœdès (1931 ) 
challenged Przyluski’s interpretation, arguing that 
the imagery reflects three life scenes of Kṛṣṇa from 
the Hindu text Bh āgavatapur āṇa. Przyluski (1933 ) 
countered Cœdès’ reading of the Trà Kiệu reliefs 
as the miracle of the hunchback, the merchants’ 
offering to Kṛṣṇa, and the breaking of Kaṃsa’s 
arch. He also suggested that the Trà Kiệu pedes-
tal should be viewed in the direction of the right 
(pradakṣiṇa) to honour the divinity supported on 
Fig. 9.3: Trà Kiệu Pedestal, Campā, 10th century.
© George Cœdès, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 31, 1931, Pl. XVII
top. Phạm Hữu Mý (1995 ) has suggested that the 
images reflected the royal family of Bhārata from 
the Mah ābhārata while Trần Kỳ Phương (2
000) 
has argued that the pedestal depicts the wedding 
of Sītā and R āma from the Rāmāyaṇa epic.
Some of the figures can be confidently iden -
tified as related to Indian texts, but many cannot. 
Therefore, any monothetic hypothetical interpre-
tations would unduly impose an identification on 
the figures. Without dismissing the possibility that 
the visual narrative may be connected to a particu -
lar episode of the Bh āgavatapur āṇa, the Mah ā- 
bhārata or the Rāmāyaṇa epics, I focus on the Trà 
Kiệu pedestal and its reliefs as a visual document 
reinforcing royal or court identifications. The cir-
culation of the narrative may be combined with an 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   308 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 311] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā309
oral tradition that used various Indic heroes to tell 
local stories. The reliefs display what to modern 
audiences would seem a disjointed series of ex-
cerpts from epic or sacred narratives, but were 
likely well understood by the Cams through their 
own cultural lens. 
James Scott argues that ‘in the case of oral 
histories and narratives, the concept of “the orig-
inal” simply does not make sense. Oral culture 
exists and is sustained only through each unique 
performance at a particular time and place for an 
interested audience’ (Scott 2009 : 230). Seen from 
this perspective, the difficulty in locating the orig-
inal or a single story for the carvings on the Trà 
Kiệu pedestal is not surprising. The recourse to 
Indian texts to comprehend Southeast Asian art is 
found in most scholarly interpretations, but how 
those texts were understood in Southeast Asia 
is not certain. Even if there was some certainty 
about the identification of a group of characters 
in terms of a specific text, we cannot know if the 
local interpretation was consistent with the Indic 
textual one. As far as I know, there are no extant 
Cam representations of the Kauṇḍinya myth or 
life scenes of Kṛṣṇa and the visual representations 
depicted on the Trà Kiệu pedestal would be unique 
if we identify them as such. Based on inscriptions 
and other visual arts related to the Rāmāyaṇa in 
Campā, there is sufficient visual evidence that the 
Trà Kiệu pedestal depicts characters from the 
Rāmāyaṇa, but which specific stories and scenes 
from the epic remains subject to debate.
In addition to conflicting interpretations 
about the story carved on the Trà Kiệu pedestal, 
the scholarship is not conclusive about its date. 
Two time periods are proposed in the literature 
for the object: early 7 th-century or a much later 
one, closer to the 10 th century. For instance, Henri 
Parmentier and Trầ n Kỳ Phương date the pedes-
tal to the 7 th–8 th century, while Jean Boisselier, 
Emmanuel Guillon, and Anne-Valérie Schweyer 
place the pedestal in the 10 th century. Using recent 
scholarship, archaeological findings, and careful 
visual analysis, I will argue that the Trà Kiệu ped-
estal dates closest to the 10 th century. dating of the liṅga-yoni and the  
trà kiệu pedestal
It is possible that the large liṅga-yoni still paired 
with the Trà Kiệu pedestal in the Đà Nẵng Museum 
of Cam Sculpture is dated earlier than the pedestal 
itself. Trần Kỳ Phương argues that a 7th-century 
yoni from Hà Trung is similar to the form of the liṅ -
ga-yoni on top of the Trà Kiệu pedestal (Trần 2018 : 
128). The Hà Trung yoni is elaborately decorated 
with two rows of petals. The first row includes four-
leaf petals with an inverted fleuron at the centre. On 
the bottom of the Hà Trung yoni , there are addi -
tional carvings of floral, leaf, and spiral decorations. 
The petals are separated between another inverted 
fleuron carved on the top rim. This fleuron motif 
also appears on the Trà Kiệu pedestal. 
A second, round yoni with the inscription of 
Prakāśadharma (C. 97) from Mỹ Sơn is also com-
parable stylistically to the liṅga-yoni of Trà Kiệu 
(Trần 2018: 128). The yoni is carved with an in -
scription on the centre of its body, which dates to 
the 7th century (Fig. 9.4). The inscription states, 
‘this [kośa] for [the liṅga of] Vāmeśvara, installed 
by Sri Vikrāntavarman, the lion among kings, will 
endure as long as the world exists’ (Golzio 2004: 
29). The kośa is a metal cover for the liṅga that 
can be added and removed, and is thought to be 
installed as an offering after lustration rituals (Guy 
1998, 2018: 89). This suggests that various things 
were placed on liṅgas and the placement of objects 
could also change over time.8 Except for stylistic 
connections, there is little evidence that the inscrip -
tion of Prakāśadharma is related to the Trà Kiệu 
pedestal and the liṅga-yoni. The base of the yoni 
with inscription carries decorative designs of lotus 
petals, with one large single petal alternating with 
two doubled petals around the rim. Trần argues 
that the ‘round-shaped yoni decorated with large 
doubled lotus petals was introduced as a new art 
form in the late seventh century’ (Trần 2018: 128). 
8. This is true for sculptures of different cultures includ -
ing Gr
eece, India, and China, where the original objects 
may have been clothed, painted, or surrounded by flowers 
among other things for their intended purposes. 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   309 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 312] ---
Mya Chau310
Liṅga-yonis were constructed in different shapes 
and sizes with varying decorative motifs from the 
7th to the 9 th centuries. There is a circular hole 
in the yoni and the museum has recently inserted 
what it sees as the correct Trà Kiệu liṅga. However, 
the hole does not descend into the square base. 
Without the liṅga-yoni, the base is an autonomous 
object, and there is no other Cam yoni with images 
from the Rāmāyaṇa. 
On the basis of the above considerations, I 
suggest the pedestal should be studied separately 
from the liṅga-yoni, without excluding the possi -
bility that another deity or multiple objects may 
be originally paired with the decorated base. A 
9th–10 th-century date is the most likely as the 
subject and decoration of the reliefs can be com -
pared to prominent 10 th-century artworks related 
to the Rāmāyaṇa in Java, Cambodia, and Campā.9 
During a 2001  excavation in Quảng Nam province 
9. Unlike the modular 7th-century Mỹ Sơn pedestal, com -
prised of several small blocks that form a small cella inside 
a temple, what is highly distinctive about 10th-century Trà 
Kiệu pedestal, is that it consists of a single raised pedestal 
with elaborate figurative scenes. Excavation reports show 
that the pedestal was found split into two parts, and it was 
reassembled in the Tourane outdoor garden and the Đà 
Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture. of central Vietnam, archaeologists discovered nar -
rative reliefs depicting the Rāmāyaṇa on the foun-
dations of a 10 th-century temple, namely one of 
three temples at the archaeological site of Khương 
Mỹ. Cecelia Levin (2008 ) argues that the narrative 
reliefs from the Khương Mỹ temple have artistic 
connections to the Rāmāyaṇa reliefs in South 
India and Java.10 The foundation bases from the 
Khương Mỹ temples include scenes of the sighting 
and pursuit of the golden deer, the abduction of 
Sītā, and the confrontation between Rāvaṇa and 
Sītā ( ibid. : 88).
Levin sees architectural connections between 
Cam and Javanese temples. She states, ‘the assigna -
tion of Khương Mỹ to the early Classical phase of 
[Cam] art [10 th century] was made on the overall 
basis of architectural ornamentation and particu-
lar stylistic links shared with Classical Javanese 
monuments’ (Levin 2008 : 90). She also observes 
an association between Campā’s matrilineal society 
and Sītā depicted as a powerful figure, rejecting 
Rāvaṇa’s advances, at Khương Mỹ. Her observa -
tion of the importance of the matrilineal culture is 
bolstered by Tr ần Kỳ Phương and Rie Nakamura’s 
article about the dualist cult of Cam society. They 
suggest that two sanctuaries, M ỹ Sơn and Pô Nagar, 
‘reflect certain characteristics of the cosmological 
dualism’ defined as a Cam male and female dichot -
omy (Trần and Nakamura 2012 : 208 ).
Inscriptions and icons found at two Cam sites 
suggest that from the 8th to the 13th century, M ỹ 
Sơn was built for the God Bhadreśvara (benev-
olent Śiva/Mountain/Father) and Pô Nagar for  
the Goddess Bhagavatī (Pô Nagar/Sea/Mother) 
(ibid.: 274). The authors conclude that M ỹ Sơn and 
Pô Nagar symbolized the female and male realm, 
respectively, thus revealing an emphasis on Cam 
cosmological dualism. In volume two of this edited 
collection, Roy E. Jordaan discusses the possibility 
for the representation of Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s daughter 
at Candi Prambanan. What is clear is that both 
cultures in Java and Campā had local expressions 
and an emphasis on lineage, kinship, and parent-
age, all of which reflect Southeast Asian traditions 
practised in the 9th–10th centuries. In addition, 
10. On the latest scholarship regarding the R āmāyaṇa  
in mediaeval Indian art, see Julie Romain’s dissertation 
(Romain 2015). 
Fig. 9.4: Y oni Pedestal with the inscription of 
Prakāśadharma (C. 97), Campā, 7th century. 
© Trần Ky Phương
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   310 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 313] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā311
Levin has theorized some connections of artistic 
elements such as temple motifs and foliage found 
in Campā and Java, which may have a common 
origin in China (Tu 2018 : 84). Following these 
suggestions, the artistic relationships to consider 
between Campā and related cultures would include 
Cambodia and China, as well as Java.
inscriptions and historical records
The interaction between Campā and Java is men -
tioned in inscriptions, which record, for example, 
Java’s sea attack against the Cams in the 8th century. 
An inscription dated to 787 /788  CE reads, 
Then owing to the excess of faults in the Kali 
Age it (i.e., the temple […]) was burnt by the 
army of Java coming by means of ships, and be -
came empty, in the year of the Śakas denoted 
‘nine, ambara, adri’ [709]. (Golzio 2004: 43)
Peter Sharrock has noted that the relationship 
between the Cams and the Khmers has ‘too often 
been characterized as continuous warfare. A close 
look shows a succession of friendships, and mili -
tary, economic and cultural alliances’ (Sharrock et 
al. 2018 : 111). Similar to the interaction between 
Campā and Cambodia, there is little detailed 
history of the nature and dating of the relationships 
between the Cams and the Javanese. However, there 
is evidence of contact, both military and economic. 
Arlo Griffiths states that ‘the ancient name 
of the island of Java, and its identifiability with 
various similar-sounding names known from 
ancient Southeast Asian, Chinese and Arab sources, 
is an old problem, compounded by the fact that 
similar-sounding and obviously related names in 
some modern mainland Southeast Asian languages 
refer not to the Javanese or to Java in particular, 
but to Malays or the Malay world in general, or to 
localities in northern Laos’ (Griffiths 2013 : 49). He 
suggests that Khmer inscriptions refer to the island 
of Java. Griffiths concludes that there were ‘inter-
national political relations between Khmer, Cam 
and Javanese polities in the late 8th and early 9th 
century of our era’ (ibid.: 76). The visual and textual 
evidence has not been comprehensively analysed, 
but both type of sources will shed some light on 
the warfare exchanges between the Cams and the Javanese, as well as less explored areas such as sim-
ilarities between their military and courtly cultures. 
Intriguing evidence for peaceful diplomatic in-
terchange is found in the 10 th-century Nhan Bièu 
inscription from Campā that records the historical 
connection between Java and Campā in the form 
of a royal officer’s two expeditions to Java. The in-
scription states, 
He was a favorite captain of the king Śrī Jaya- 
siṃhavarman and had riches equal to his de -
sires. He was named Pov Kluñ Piliḥ Rājadvāra. 
At the command of the king he went to the cap -
ital of Yavadvīpa on a diplomatic mission and 
obtained credit by the success of his under -
taking… Again, at the commands of the king 
he went to Yavadvīpa a second time and was 
successful in his undertaking. (Golzio 2004: 
112–113)
While we do not know the journey’s objectives, they 
were considered successful, and it is assumed that 
they would have introduced new cultural and re -
ligious knowledge to both the Javanese and Cam 
courts.
Chinese historical records indicate that the 
Cams exchanged Javanese textiles with China. For 
example, textual sources document that in 963  CE, 
an envoy from Campā brought to China differ -
ent types of Javanese textiles such as ‘gu  thin silk 
from the country of Ma-li-yan-luan in Java’ , and 
‘gu thin silk from Sha-wan in Java’ (Wade 2011 : 
161). Whether or not these were actual Javanese 
textiles cannot be verified, but what is important 
to stress is that the Chinese accepted the textiles as 
Javanese. The documents indicated that the Cams, 
the Chinese, and the Javanese operated within the 
international circle, either directly or indirectly 
during the 9th–10 th centuries. The Cams pre -
sented the Chinese with Javanese textiles, among 
other trade objects, while likely receiving military 
weapons and horses in exchange.11
Faxian’s account of the sea passage from India 
to China in A Record of Buddhist Kingdoms (399 –
414 CE) indicated travels to Java-dvīpa (Java). His 
passage reads, 
11. Ibid.: 11. The Chinese refer to these as tributes, but 
such encounters were never one-sided and the Cams would 
always receive something in return, particularly goods and 
other textiles. 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   311 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 314] ---
Mya Chau312
After proceeding… more than ninety days, 
they arrive at a country called Java-dvipa, 
where various forms of error and Brahmanism 
are flourishing, while Buddhism is not worth 
speaking of. After staying there for five months, 
Faxian again embarked in another large mer-
chantman, which also had on board more 
than 200 men. They carried provisions for fifty  
days, sailing on the 16th of April, 414. (Legge 
1965: 113)
While Faxian’s stay in Java was due to a storm 
that drove his ship off course, Java and Sumatra 
became major destinations for Chinese monks in 
the 6th and 7 th centuries to stop en route on their 
voyages to India and study Buddhist texts and learn 
Sanskrit. The doors were open wide for cultural 
interchange.
Furthermore, Campā and Java are connected 
through their cultural appreciation and shared 
artistic iconography for the sacred epic, the 
Rāmāyaṇa. The visual and textual material in the 
Rāmāyaṇa reinforces kingship and ‘the develop -
ment of the notions of political authority in South -
east Asia, most notably in the ancient—and emi-
nently “Southeast Asian”—conception of the king 
as a “man of prowess” endowed with superhuman 
abilities and worshipped by his entourage in terms 
of bhakti relationships’ (Acri 2017 : 10). There is 
ample evidence that the R āmāyaṇa was celebrated 
in Campā. A Cam inscription dating to the 7th 
century reveals the worship and divine nature of 
Vālmīki, the mythical author of the R āmāyaṇa. 
The inscription reads,
The king Prakāśadharma, destroyer of all 
hordes of enemies, possessing the qualities of 
wisdom, power, patience, fortune, glory and 
firmness, desired in the world, after the enemy 
having vanished in autumn (?), accomplished 
here the place of veneration for the best of po -
ets and great Ṛṣi Vālmīki whom he honored 
full of sorrow with the Brahma-Śloka, he, who 
is the human form of the old male Viṣṇu… his temple… was built again. (Golzio 2004: 12)
In the inscription, the poet Vālmīki is honoured as 
a sage and an embodiment of Viṣṇu. In another inscription, the Mỹ Sơn Stele Inscrip -
tion of Prakāśadharma, dating to 656  CE, the king 
describes himself as
Constantly devoted to the Brāhmaṇas, the 
gods among men, (he was) gracefully attended 
by enemies subdued by his own prowess; (he 
was) the cause of Lakṣmī pride; Śrī Lakṣmī, 
in the fond hope that he was Rāma, son of 
king Daśaratha, dutifully followed him, and 
this was very worthy of her indeed! (Golzio  
2004: 20)
Here, the inscription places the Cam king on the 
same level as Rāma from the Rāmāyaṇa. The posi-
tion of king was often seized by usurpers through 
military prowess. Thus, the heroic Rāma, who was 
able to defeat all his enemies and rivals, was an ideal 
role model in Cam society. The kings often wrote 
of the ideal leader, frequently invoking the quintes-
sential heroic prince, Rāma. A 12 th-century Khmer 
inscription compares the Cam king to Rāvaṇa, the 
defeated enemy of Rāma. The inscription reads, 
‘Sri Jaya Indravarman, king of [Campā], arrogant 
as Rāvaṇa… having an army led by chariots, went 
to the country of Kambu equal to the heavens in 
order to fight’ (Thompson 2016 : 130). Both Khmer 
and Cam inscriptions indicate that the R āmāyaṇa 
was we
ll known by the 7 th century and continued 
to be mentioned in later inscriptions. 
military and temple culture 
Besides textual evidence, the Trà Kiệu pedestal is 
contemporary to 9th–10 th-century artistic vestiges 
from Campā that promote military culture. Mili -
tary culture includes organized labour of people for 
martial activites such as battles and horse-riding 
to express notions of political power and domi -
nance. Scholars indicate that the horse carved in 
high relief on the Trà Kiệu pedestal is stylistically 
similar to the two horses on a 10 th-century relief 
showing two polo players (Fig. 9.5). Polo games are 
connected to military training since they endow 
players with ‘speed, skill, stamina, and bravery’ 
(Bower and Mackenzie 2004 : 283). The necklace 
with round bells around the horse, hanging from 
the collar is similar in both reliefs. Furthermore, the 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   312 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 315] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā313
horse hoof is rendered in the same realistic style. 
Another similarity includes the polo player’s hairdo 
with a large, round bun tied behind the head, which 
echoes the hair of the figures illustrated on the Trà 
Kiệu pedestal (Fig. 9.3 ). This is the only surviving 
example of polo playing depicted in Southeast 
Asian art. Polo games are commonly associated 
with the horse-riding cultures of the Asian steppes, 
a region with few trees, forests, and large areas of 
open space, but were also popular in Tang China 
(Nguyễn 2018 : 206–209 ). The Cams were also ac -
complished horsemen and even reached Angkor 
by horse-drawn chariots in 1177  CE (Thompson 
2016 : 6).12 The image of two polo players on the 
balustrade of a Cam temple informs viewers about 
its significance in elite culture, specifically the royal 
court, emphasizing some traits of Sinitic courtly 
culture in Campā. 
Four lions carved on each corner of the Trà 
Kiệu pedestal may have associations to Sinitic and 
Khmer culture, but there is little visible Chinese 
12. Peter Sharrock, personal communication, 2019.stylistic influences on the imagery. The lions on 
the Trà Kiệu pedestal have two of their rear paws 
raised in the position of attack, similar to sculptural 
lions with the same posture found at sanctuaries 
of Trà Kiệu (Zéphir 2018 : 189) (Fig. 9.6).13 Scholars 
have discussed the Sinitic influences on Cam art 
which reached its apex in the 9th–10 th centuries at 
the Đồng Dương temple, which is contemporane-
ous to the Trà Kiệu pedestal (Tu 2018 : 79–86). For 
example, the large sculptures of fierce door guardi-
ans (dv ārapāla) at the Đồn g Dương temple echo the 
powerful stance and arm postures of Chinese door 
guardians (lishi ) from the Tang Dynasty (Baptiste 
2018 : 181 ). 
Constructed with local features, the unique 
Đồng Dương guardians hold their daggers with 
one arm pulled back while trampling on buffaloes, 
13.  Khmer pedestals also show an animal or figure on 
each of the four corners, with the motif of a Garuḍa or 
flying celestial goddess. At Trà Kiệu, there are roof tiles con -
structed entirely in the Han Chinese style, which reveals a 
deliberate connection to court culture and architecture of 
China and Đại Việt. For Sinitic connections, see Tu 2018.
Fig. 9.5: Polo Players, Campā, 10th century.
© George Cœdès, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 31, 1931, Pl. XVIII
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   313 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 316] ---
Mya Chau314
stressing their authority and control while taming 
a strong animal. While the body positions of the 
Cam door guardians are parallel to the Tang tra-
dition, the iconography of trampling on buffaloes 
is distinctly Indic (Baptiste 2018 : 180–181 ). In an 
expression of aggression or fear, the Cam door 
guardians bare their teeth, similar to the Cam rep-
resentation of wrestlers and monkeys discussed 
later (Nguyễn 2018 : 213). The shared commonality 
of the guardian figures is not unexpected, but it 
reveals how by the 9 th century a widespread vocab -
ulary of religious and courtly culture had been fully 
developed. The intentionally crafted expressions 
of power to include some Chinese court charac -
teristics can be interpreted as a proclamation of 
Campā as a player in the international political 
sphere, sharing a courtly worldview comparable 
to China and Đại Việt. 
Discovered in the vih āra of the Đồ ng Dương 
temple, a sandstone block carved in the round 
shows a multi-headed figure with eight arms in 
sculptural relief. Scholars have interpreted this 
piece either as a stool for the deity’s feet, an ele -
vated seat for the deity (pedestal), or a Buddhist 
offering table (Baptiste 2019 : 350) (Fig. 9.7 ). As in 
the case of the Trà Kiệu pedestal, what object or 
icons were originally placed on top of the block is 
unknown. The frontal figure has been identified as either Māra or Rāvaṇa.14 It has been argued that 
the figure is the demon Māra who distracts the 
Buddha by shaking earth and awakening the nāgas  
on the two sides (Baptiste 2019 : 343). A second 
interpretation suggests that the figure is possibly 
Rāvaṇa, the demon-king and enemy of Rāma, who 
shakes Mount Kailāsa while Śiva and his cohort 
sit above the mountain.15 The figure depicted on 
the block is comparable to a 10 th-century Cam 
lintel from Mỹ Sơn F1 showing Rāvaṇa shaking 
Mount Kailāsa. The demon-king Rāvaṇa stands 
next to a miniature temple, along with Gaṇeśa 
and Śiva’s vehicle, the bull (Dhar 2019 : 367). Parul 
Pandya Dhar has identified the different compo -
nents of the depicted Cam miniature temple to 
include a stair-way banister, a plastered wall, and 
a trident on a pedestal for the roof (Dhar 2018 : 
61). The trident on the pedestal highlights the im-
portance of ritual practices with actual temples 
and pedestals in Campā. On the Mỹ Sơn F1 lintel, 
Śiva is partially visible seated above the mountain. 
14. The image also echoes the generic figure who can fly 
from e
arth to spiritual realms and vice-versa, featured on 
the central image of the Mỹ Sơn E1 pedestal.
15. Māra depicted with multiple heads and arms is uncom-
mon. Henry Parmentier identifies the figure as a monster. 
See the discussion in Baptiste 2019.
Fig. 9.6: Trà Kiệu Pedestal, detail of lion, Campā, 10th 
century.
© Doktor Max, CC0 1.0
Fig. 9.7: Pedestal, Đồng Dương, Campā, 9th–10th 
century.
© Pierre Baptiste, National Museum of Asian Arts-
Guimet, Paris
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   314 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 317] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā315
Most representations depict Rāvaṇa shaking the 
mountain placed at the bottom under the enor -
mous Śiva temple that is rock cut into the moun-
tain. The mountain itself is a metaphor for the 
home of Śiva and Pārvatī. In addition, the temple 
itself symbolized the sacred mountain that is the 
home of a gods, a pīṭha. At the rock-cut Kailāsa 
Temple at Ellora in India, Rāvaṇa is depicted at 
the base of the temple where he is carved into a 
deep cavity (Dhar 2019 : 364). The temple is liter-
ally carved out of the mountain itself, so that the 
mountain and temple are one. Rāvaṇa is placed as 
if under the temple, trying to shake it, indicating 
its identification as Mount Kailāsa on which Śiva 
and Pārvatī live. The temple is the mountain on 
which Śiva and all of the gods live, thus a pīṭha. 
The gods can also descend from the metaphorical 
mountain to the physical Cam temple, the seat 
of the divine. Therefore, the figure from Đồ ng 
Dương is a symbol of the nature of the pedestal 
and the sacred pīṭha, not of any specific narrative. 
Pierre Baptiste has discussed the importance of the  
pīṭha in Śilpaś āstra texts (Baptiste 2005 : 109). This  
also indicates that various gods and their home—
whether they were Buddhist, Hindu, or stemming 
from local beliefs—were integrated and revered in 
the highly developed Cam temple culture during the 9th–10 th centuries. 
The identity of the carved figure on the Đồ ng 
Dương block remains unknown, but Parul Pandya 
Dhar argues that ‘what is certain, however, is the 
deliberate adaptation of a well-known Śaivite 
iconographic formula, namely the Rāvaṇānu -
grahamūrti, at the predominately Buddhist site 
of Đồ ng Dương’ (Dhar 2019 : 372). The figure’s 
iconographical features with the attributes of 
Rāvaṇa attests to the popularity of the R āmāyaṇa  
during the 9 th–10 th centuries in Cam Buddhist or 
Hindu contexts. These features include the multi-
ple heads and arms, and the body tilted back with 
legs bent, which create energy and movement in 
the Cam relief.16 With eight arms spread out, the 
16. In addition to the scuplture of Lakṣmī discovered at 
Trà K
iệu, a lintel showing Lakṣmī  lustrated by elephants 
has also been found at the Đồng Dương temple. Lakṣmī  is 
a goddess prominent in both Buddhist and Hindu contexts.figure could also be flying from the earthly realm 
to the spiritual world or vice-versa.17 
Attention has been placed on the carved 
imagery on the front of the block, but the back is 
also significant. On the back side of this object is 
an elevated seat or pedestal associated with similar 
seats for kingly figures rendered on the Trà Kiệu 
pedestal and later royal court scenes found in the 
archaeological sites of Mỹ Sơn and Chánh Lộ. The 
legs of the seat form a hollow space under the block, 
with nāgas visible on both sides, which I interpret 
as highlighting the concept of the nāga-
king. The 
top edges of the block are decorated with elab -
orate alternating bands of geometric, lotus, and 
floral designs. Baptiste suggests that the block is 
an offering table (bali-pīṭha)  because the size of 
the block is too small for an actual seat, the pīṭha 
(Baptiste 2019 : 350). The elevated pedestal, whether 
a seat or table, is a sacred object which reinforces 
the divine home, and the metaphorical seat for 
the god is also the seat for a kingly figure. We do 
not know the original purpose of the sandstone 
block, but whatever its possible function, I believe 
it reinforces royal-divine identifications. In addi-
tion, it is associated to contemporary reliefs seen 
on the Trà Kiệu pedestal and other later Cam art 
showing kingly figures seated on a similar elevat-
ed structure. The 7th-century Khmer lintel from 
Wat Eng Khna shows the Khmer king seated on 
a different type of pedestal during his coronation 
ceremony (Fig. 9.14 ). While we do not know what 
the Khmer king’s actual throne looked like, the 
sacred power of the pedestal is connected to both 
the divine and the royal spheres.
In addition to a highly distinctive temple 
culture in Campā, there are royal associations as 
well. Dhar interprets the presence of Rāvaṇa as ‘a 
demon-king or anti-hero’ and a metaphor for the 
enemy-king, which once again highlights the char-
acter of the opponent and necessity for military 
protection.18 As Dhar argues, ‘available evidence, 
though fragmentary, reveals an ingenious adap -
17. This was first suggested by Robert L. Brown in 2015.
18. The Đồng D
ương temple is predominately Buddhist, 
but there are local and Hindu elements incorporated at 
the site, which require further research. 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   315 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 318] ---
Mya Chau316
tion of this narrative in a manner that was steeped 
in the concerns and predilections of the elite cul-
tures of [Campā]’ (Dhar 2019 : 373). If the Trà Kiệu 
pedestal is examined further and placed along -
side contemporary 9 th–10 th-century arts, three 
common iconographic elements from Campā 
related to Javanese and Khmer courtly culture 
emerge. Stephen Murphy calls for distinguishing 
‘between shared motifs resulting from the common 
iconographic vocabulary originating from India, 
and patterns stemming from intra-regional links’ 
(Murphy 2019 : 303). This reinforces what many 
scholars have argued regarding the significance of 
localized iconography in different cultures (Brown 
1996 ; Wolters 1999 [ 1982 ]). The iconography fol-
lowing a Southeast Asian tradition in the 9 th–10 th 
centuries includes archers with bows, architectural 
features, and dancing apsarases.
archers with bows
The iconography of the archer with bow is essential 
for the identification of the figure on the Trà Kiệu 
pedestal as Rāma (Fig. 9.8). The frontal Rāma is 
shown as an archer who lunges, with his left leg 
slightly bent and extended forward and right leg 
bent at the knee, a pose known as praty ālīḍhāsa-
na.19 In his left hand, he holds his bow, while his 
right arm is pulled back to launch the arrow. In the 
narrative, King Janaka agrees to give his daughter 
Sītā as wife to anyone who can bend his sacred bow. 
Rāma not only bends the bow, but breaks it in front 
of the king and his court. Depicted on the Trà Kiệu 
pedestal, Rāma’s broken bow is bent on the top, 
revealing his physical strength. Furthermore, Rāma 
is also carved in a similar position in a 9th-century 
Javanese relief in the Prambanan temple, showing 
Rāma who defeats various creatures at sea (Fig. 9.9). 
Characters in poses resembling praty ālīḍhāsana 
also appear in other 10th-century artistic vestiges 
of Campā. Extant examples of this posture include 
two male figures wrestling each other. The two op-
ponents place their hands on each partner’s thigh 
with arm raised, carved in high relief on the stair-
19. Robert L. Brown, personal communication, 2015.case of the 10th-century Khương Mỹ temple (Fig. 
9.10). In a second example, a 10 th-century relief 
also illustrates two defeated figures and a stand -
ing monkey with an inscription that reads, ‘army 
of monkeys in the middle of the city of Laṅkā... 
hurling’ (Griffiths et al. 2012 : 238) (Fig. 9.11). With 
its teeth exposed, the monkey stands in a similar 
position to Rāma and the two wrestlers, a posture 
that indicates physical strength and stamina. 
The image of the archer in praty ālīḍhāsana 
with the iconography of the arched bow is shared 
between Javanese and Cam artistic conventions. 
In 2001 , archaeologists found sculptural reliefs 
depicting the major events from the R āmāyaṇa at 
the foundation of the Khương Mỹ temple. Scholars 
have found captions on the foundation bases, but 
most of them are illegible. One, written in Cam, 
mentions characters from the R āmāyaṇa such as 
Lakṣmaṇa and Śūrpaṇakhā (ibid.: 23
9). The Cam 
language contains words borrowed from San-
skrit and the inscription is written in the same 
style found in two bas-reliefs held at the Đà Nẵng 
Museum of Cham Sculpture. Thus, scholars have 
suggested that the reliefs from Khương Mỹ and 
the two R āmāyaṇa bas-reliefs are dateable to the 
10th century (ibid.). A foundation base at Khương 
Mỹ depicts Rāma shooting an arched arrow from 
his bow to capture the golden deer (Levin 2008 : 
87). The deer stands in front of a large tree with its 
body pierced by the arrow. The position of the bow 
with his left hand and the rendering of the bow in 
profile echoes the image of Rāma holding Rudra’s 
bow on the Trà Kiệu pedestal (Fig. 9.8 ). 
The movement of artistic motifs across geo -
graphical and cultural boundaries was often docu-
mented in terms of decorative objects. Metal dishes 
travelled easily across borders due to their diminu-tive size and to their lack of esoteric iconographic 
and religious meanings. One example is a 9th-cen-
tury imported dish found in Campā, which illus -
trates three mounted horse riders holding either a 
spear or an arched bow, alternating between ele -
phants and trees (Fig. 9.12 ). The mounted archer 
with bow shoots an animal leaping from behind a 
tree. The archer is depicted in a manner similar to the one seen on the foundation bases at Khương 
Mỹ, and also resonates with the iconography of 
Rāma’s bow on the Trà Kiệu pedestal (Fig. 9.8 ). 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   316 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 319] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā317
Fig. 9.8: Trà Kiệu Pedestal, detail of Rāma, Campā, 10th century.
© Joanna Williams
Fig. 9.9: Prambanan temple, detail of Rāma, Java, 9th century.
© Mya Chau 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   317 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 320] ---
Mya Chau318
Fig. 9.11: Relief of two defeated figures and a standing 
monkey, Campā, 10th century.
© Mya Chau Fig. 9.10: Wrestlers, Campā, 10th century.
© Mya Chau 
Fig. 9.12: Footed dish with equestrian hunting scene, 
9th century. 
© Metropolitian Museum of Art, New Y ork 
Fig. 9.13: Candi Panataran, Indrajit, the son of Rāvaṇa, 
attacking Hanumān with a bow, 12th–15th century.
© Mya Chau 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   318 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 321] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā319
The bow is carved in the same way as in the dish 
and the relief at Khương Mỹ, showing the arch of 
the bow slightly bent on the edges with the archer’s 
hand firmly gripping the centre of the bow. A relief 
from Candi Panataran (12 th–15 th century) in East 
Java depicts Indrajit, the son of Rāvaṇa, attacking 
Hanumān with a bow, reflecting the same iconog-
raphy of the mounted archer with bow (Fig. 9.13 ). 
The sculptor highlights a thick bow arched on the 
ends similar to a flying boomerang. I suggest that 
the archer with bow is a visual representation of 
the king’s perceived military stability in Campā 
and Java. Even more generally, the archer with a 
bow exemplifies the male hero, both human and 
deity, as a symbol of power, bravery, and victory. 
architectural features
The image of the open-air pavilion on the Khương 
Mỹ relief reveals a continuing shared Cam-Khmer 
artistic tradition. The roof of the Cam pavilion 
includes pointed crenellations, a motif first seen 
in the 7 th century at Wat Eng Khna. The Khmer 
lintel shows the Lingodbhavamūrti myth and the 
consecration of a king seated in an open-air pa-
vilion with similar crenellations (Guy 2014 : 165) 
(Fig. 9.14). Khmer examples with extant pointed 
roof crenellations include the 11 th-century temple 
of Preah Vihear and 12 th-century reliefs from 
Banteay Chhmar. While seen in the Khmer lintel, 
such crenellations have not been found on Cam 
temples. The Cam reliefs express an emphasis on 
martial symbols, as the crenellations reflected a de-
fensive wall to launch arrows similar to the carved 
imagery of Rāma’s arrows. Cecelia Levin suggests 
that the open pavilion has Javanese, Chinese, and 
Malay architectural links, but another possibility is 
that this stems from a local Cam-Khmer creation 
(Levin 2008 : 99). I interpret the crenellations as 
an artistic convention shared between the Khmer 
and Cam, reflecting similarities in military culture. 
Iconographical analysis beyond the region of 
Campā connects its art production to Cambodia 
and Java during the 9th–10 th centuries. An icono-
graphic feature on the Trà Kiệu pedestal is the 
fleuron hanging from the upper border above the 
kneeling female (Fig. 9.15 ). Rather than being used 
as a decorative border as in Khmer lintels, the motif is used instead to mark the central character in the 
Trà Kiệu relief panel. Martin Polkinghorne (2007 : 
226) identified the inverted fleuron as a common 
motif found on Khmer temple lintels and repre -
sentative of a 10 th-century workshop in Cambodia 
(Fig. 9.16). The inclusion of the motif suggests a 
shared artistry between Cambodia and Campā in 
the 10 th century.
Another feature linking the Javanese and the 
Cams is the representation of a miniature temple, 
accompanied by an active figure. This highlights 
the importance of temple culture and documents that religious activity was carried out both inside 
and around the temple. As mentioned earlier, an 
example of this is a 10 th-century lintel from Mỹ Sơn 
F1, which depicts Rāvaṇa shaking Mount Kailāsa 
(Fig. 9.17). In praty ālīḍhāsana
 and other positions, 
the multi-headed and twenty-armed Rāvaṇa is ren -
dered beside a miniature temple. A Javanese relief 
from the R āmāyaṇa at Candi
 Panataran shows a 
temple reminiscent to the carved miniature temple 
found in Mỹ Sơn F1 (Fig. 9.18 ). The representation 
of a temple with an active figure such as Rāvaṇa and 
the actual temple relief links temple culture with 
people. The illustration of the miniature temple 
reflects Javanese temples such as the smaller dated 
temple in the Panataran complex.20 
dancing apsaras es
The female celestial dancer is common in South 
and Southeast Asia, and there is some specific 
iconography to the apsarases in Cambodia, Java, 
and Campā. One of the four sides of the Trà Kiệu 
pedestal depicts a row of eleven dancing apsarases 
(Fig. 9.3).21 In the relief, the dancers’ two legs are 
20. The earliest stratum of Candi Panataran has been 
dated to the late 12th century, hence later than the Mỹ Sơn 
F1 temple. And yet, this miniature temple could reflect 
earlier Javanese motifs that have not survived given the 
scant archaeological record of the 10th–11th century in 
East Java, and that may have been the prototypes of the 
Cam material. I thank Andrea Acri for this comment. 
21. Peter Sharrock also notes that in Khmer reliefs there is 
a distinction drawn between dancers and devat ās with fe et 
on the ground and apsaras es in flight (as in the Churning 
of the Milk Ocean at Angkor Wat) with the rear leg also 
lifted. The Trà Kiệu pedestal has two flying figures (Fig. 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   319 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 322] ---
Mya Chau320
Fig. 9.14: Wat Eng Khna Lintel, Cambodia, 7th century.
© Joanna Williams
Fig. 9.15: Trà Kiệu Pedestal, Campā, 10th century.
© Joanna Williams
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   320 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 323] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā321
Fig. 9.16: Inverted Fleurons, Cambodia, 10th century.
© Martin Polkinghorne
Fig. 9.17: Lintel, Mỹ Sơn F1, Rāvaṇa shaking Mount Kailāsa, Campā, 10th century.
© Mya Chau 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   321 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 324] ---
Mya Chau322
Fig. 9.18: Candi Panataran, Java, 12th–15th century.
© Regents of University Michigan, Department of the History of Art, Visual Resource Collection
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   322 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 325] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā323
bent outward at the knees and crossed or almost 
crossed at the ankles, creating a lively rhythm 
across the relief. Furthermore, their hands comple -
ment the position of their legs, bringing additional 
movement to the scene. The repetition of dancing 
apsarases on the pedestal of Trà Kiệu reflects an 
important component of royal culture and serves 
as an artistic inspiration for later Cam secular art. 
While Pierre Baptiste does not focus on the nar -
rative reliefs of the colossal Trà Kiệu pedestal, he 
makes the distinction between a pedestal and the 
foundation base of Cam temples. Baptiste argues 
that another object found in Trà Kiệu, the so-called 
‘dancer’ pedestal is not a pedestal, but rather the 
decorated high-relief foundation of the Trà Kiệu 
tower. This relief is by art historical consensus con-
temporary with the Trà Kiệu pedestal. The dancer’s 
head is tilted with one hand close to her head, while 
she softly twists and curves her upper body and legs 
in the relief, reflecting the super-human abilities 
of the female. 
The later, 11 th-century sandstone bas-reliefs on 
the foundation walls of three Chiên Đàn temples 
(Fig. 9.19) reveal close similarities to the narrative 
reliefs of Trà Kiệu. The architects of the Chiên 
Đàn temples may have copied the images from 
the Trà Kiệu pedestal (Schweyer and Paisarn 
2012 : 145). The dancing figures resemble Cam and 
Khmer lintels, representing Śiva dancing on an al-
tar-pedestal in this position. In Java, the 9 th-centu -
ry Candi Prambanan also depicts reliefs of female 
dancers to evoke the spiritual realm (Fig. 9.21 ). 
The foundation reliefs of the Chiên Đàn towers 
of Campā depict dancers with the same dance 
position, resonating with the scene from the Trà 
Kiệu pedestal (Fig. 9.22 ). The images on the Chiên 
Đàn temples are less refined, with forms much 
thicker than those of early dancing figures, but 
still echoing the imagery from the sophisticated 
Trà Kiệu pedestal.
A sculptural relief from Mỹ Sơn dated to the 
11th century depicts a royal figure seated on an 
elevated pedestal carrying a sword in his left hand 
(Fig. 9.23). His posture is reminiscent of the kingly 
9.20) who could be called apsaras es, and a full row of eleven 
dancers with feet on the ground (Fig. 9.22). Peter Sharrock, 
personal communication, 2020.figure from the Trà Kiệu panel with one leg po-
sitioned to the side of his seat (Fig. 9.24 ). In this 
later relief, the seated figure’s head is also frontal, 
but his body is turned to his side to display his 
long weapon. Two attendants hold umbrellas on 
both sides of him to indicate his royal authority. A 
third attendant carries a flywhisk on his right side. 
Besides the attendant with the flywhisk, there are a 
total of eleven dancers and musicians, in parallel to 
the eleven apsaras es from the Trà Kiệu pedestal. In 
addition, on the right, there are two female dancers 
with flexed legs and three musicians, playing the 
drums, cymbals, and a horn instrument. On the 
left of the central figure there is a seated figure 
with a bell and two pairs of dancers and musicians 
(Chemburkar 2018 : 220). Echoing a similar fleuron 
displayed on the Trà Kiệu pedestal, an inverted 
fleuron also hangs beside the attendant and the 
dancer. This scene illustrates the dancers in the 
royal court, but also expresses the military strength 
of the court administration with the presence of a 
weapon. Another 11 th-century relief found in the 
archaeological site of Chánh Lộ, in Quảng Ngãi, 
Vietnam depicts a similar composition with the 
same theme, namely a central royal figure seated 
on an elevated pedestal carrying a sword, and sur -
rounded by eleven dancers and musicians on both 
sides (Figs. 9.25 –9.26 ). This court scene is repeated 
throughout the relief to spread the visual ideals 
of courtly culture with the inclusion of celestial 
dancers and courtiers, a scene first carved on the 
Trà Kiệu pedestal.
One common visual characteristic among 
representations of the feminine in Javanese and 
Cam culture is the rendering of the woman’s arm. 
Cam apsaras es are rendered with ‘one arm bent 
with elbow inside in a forward curve’ (Lunsingh 
Scheurleer 2011 : 113). There are variations for the 
placement of the arms in this special gesture, which 
includes the second hand clasping the elbow or the 
second arm handing freely.22 The modern Javanese 
22.  Stephen Murphy identifies the gesture in the context 
of Campā and Dvāravatī culture appearing as early as the 
7th century, describing the posture as ‘left arm straight, 
left palm down, right hand clasping left on or above or in 
some examples underneath the elbow’ (Murphy 2019: 311). 
However, the left arm is not completely straight; it is bent 
in a curve. The ‘arm bent with elbow inside in a forward 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   323 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 326] ---
Mya Chau324
Fig. 9.20: Trà Kiệu Pedestal, detail of flying figures, Campā, 10th century.
© Daderot, CC0 1.0Fig. 9.19: Dancers, Chiên Đàn temples, Campā, 11th century.
© Mya Chau 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   324 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 327] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā325
Fig. 9.21: Candi Prambanan, Java, 9th century.
© Mya Chau 
Fig. 9.22: Trà Kiệu Pedestal, detail of dancers, Campā, 10th century.
© Doktor Max, CC0 1.0
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   325 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 328] ---
Mya Chau326
Fig. 9.23: Lintel, Mỹ Sơn, Campā, 11th century.
© Mya Chau 
Fig. 9.24: Trà Kiệu Pedestal, Campā, 10th century.
© Jean Przyluski, Revue des arts asiatiques  6/2, 1929–1930, Pl. XX
Fig. 9.25: Lintel, Chánh Lộ, Campā, 11th century.
© Mya Chau 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   326 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 329] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā327
Fig. 9.26: Lintel, detail of dancers, Chánh Lộ, Campā, 11th century.
© Mya Chau
term for this highly flexed arm position is ndheng -
klang (ibid. : 122). Lunsingh Scheurleer suggests 
that this arm position designates elegant, amicable 
women, while van Lohuizen posits the women are 
in love and Lydia Kieven states it is a convention 
for women’s love-yearning (ibid. ). Regardless of the 
differences in interpretations, it indicates a shared 
artistic practice for the etiquette of court women 
and celestial dancers. 
An image of a royal couple seated on two ped-
estals carved on a 9th–10 th-century Trà Liên ped-
iment from Campā is currently displayed in the 
courtyard of the Museum of Quảng Trị in Đông Hà, 
central Vietnam (Fig. 9.27 ). The lintel depicts a king 
and queen seated underneath an enormous tree. 
Stephen Murphy (2019 : 314) notes the elaborate 
jewellery worn by the couple, which indicates their 
status as royal figures. He has also suggested that 
the two figures could represent the deities Śiva and 
Pārvatī. The identity of the two figures is difficult 
curve’ is shared between Javanese, Cam, and Dvāravatī 
cultures. In the context of Thai culture, Murphy argues that 
the gesture which clasps the elbow is known as prakhong  
to indicate politeness in a ritual context. The culture of 
Dvāravatī is beyond the scope of this chapter: see Murphy’s 
article for a discussion. to discern without an inscription, but nevertheless 
they are courtly or royal figures. Two figures are 
separated by a single tree trunk with the leaves as 
an umbrella over them, forming two elite realms 
of the male and female. The visual composition 
reflects the cosmological dualism of the Cam world. 
The tree carved on the Trà Liên pediment gives 
some cultural context for the possible identification 
of the woman as Sītā with her consort, Rāma (Figs. 
9.28–9.29 ). The seated woman carved on the Trà 
Liên pediment is depicted with the gesture of the 
arm in a forward curve, holding her elbow (Murphy 
2019 : 316). Examples of the curved arm include the 
10th-century sculpture of the dancing apsara from 
Trà Kiệu and another Trà Kiệu relief of a seated 
woman on a pedestal. Jean Boisselier has identified 
this 10th-century image as Sītā.23 Moreover, East 
Javanese reliefs at Candi Panataran illustrate Sītā’s 
arm rendered with the inverted elbow (Fig. 9.30 ). 
The interpretation is not conclusive and requires 
further research, but the imagery also reflects 
visual similarities to reliefs from Candi Panataran 
showing Sītā seated on a large pedestal behind a 
23. See École française d’Extrême-Orient Inventory No. 
EFEO_V
IE00726_e.
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   327 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 330] ---
Mya Chau328
Fig. 9.27: Trà Liên pediment, Campā, 9th–10th century.
© Mya Chau 
Fig. 9.29: Trà Liên pediment, detail, Campā, 
9th–10th century.
© Mya Chau Fig. 9.28: Trà Liên pediment, detail, Campā, 
9th–10th century.
© Mya Chau 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   328 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 331] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā329
Fig. 9.30: Candi Panataran, Java, 12th–15th century.
© Regents of University Michigan, Department of the History of Art, Visual Resource Collection
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   329 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 332] ---
Mya Chau330
tree in Javanese culture. The super-human female, 
akin to the super-human king, was a major compo -
nent to courtly culture. Elite gestures represented a 
Southeast Asian artistic tradition and contributed 
to the standardization of later Cam art.
conclusion
The 10th-century Trà Kiệu pedestal paired with a 
large sculptural liṅga-yoni installed on the top is a 
modern curatorial arrangement. The liṅga-yoni has 
little connection to the imagery carved on the Trà 
Kiệu pedestal, and may be dated earlier than the 
pedestal. Based on the carved images, I argue that 
the liṅga-yoni was unlikely to have been originally 
paired with the pedestal. Inscriptional evidence 
indicate that the R āmāyaṇa was wel l known in 
Campā and illustrated on the foundation reliefs of 
the 10th-century Khương Mỹ temples. This chapter 
has moved the study of the pedestal beyond the 
issue of dating and identification, and connected 
the object to a larger corpus of Cam, Khmer, and 
Javanese art in the 9th–10 th centuries, as well as 
later Javanese art found in Candi Panataran.
The imagery of the Trà Kiệu pedestal documents 
the artistic exchange of Java and Khmer culture 
in the 9th–10 th centuries. There are three icono-
graphic elements—archers with bows, architectural 
features, and dancing apsaras es—that I interpret 
as reinforcing courtly culture, which scholars have 
shown to have some Sinitic links. The Trà Kiệu 
pedestal presents for the first time in Cam art 
carved images reflecting battle and hunting scenes, 
which foreshadow the growing number of images 
related to combat scenes with bows and arrows, 
horse-chariots, and warriors. The 11 th-century 
foundation bases at the Chiên Đàn temples and 
reliefs from Chánh Lộ and Mỹ Sơn also echo the 
imagery on the Trà Kiệu pedestal. Through the 10 th 
and 11th centuries, one notes an increased artis -
tic production of hunting and royal scenes, which 
were not religious, but rather reflected the courtly 
culture of Campā.
The images reveal attention to military expan-
sion, courtly kingship, and artistic alliance among 
the independent entities of Campā, alongside other 
contemporary cultures in the regions of Cambo -dia and Java. Offering an alternative reading of 
the Trà Kiệu pedestal, I suggest that it was not in-
tended to be the mount for a liṅga-yoni veneration 
in altar-pedestal form—the pīṭha of Śiva. Rather, 
the pedestal represents a colossal monument in 
itself, commemorating royal-divine characters in 
a temple context with secular and sacred mean -
ings. In conjunction with highlighting royal and 
sacred relationships with Viṣṇu in the Rāmāyaṇa, 
the t
extual and visual evidence from Trà Kiệu and 
later Cam art emphasize a Cam courtly culture 
whose iconography indicates close relationships 
to that of Khmer, East Javanese, and Chinese 
culture. In the 9th–10 th centuries, influence from 
the South occurred in Campā, rather than being 
directly imported from India. It reflected a courtly 
and military ethos shared across the southern seas 
by Campā, Cambodia, Java, and China. 
References
Acri, Andrea. 2017. ‘Local vs Cosmopolitan in the 
Study of Premodern Southeast Asia’, Suvanna-  
bhumi  9/1 (June): 7–52.
Baptiste, Pierre.  2005. ‘Les piédestaux et les sou -
bassements dan l’art Cham Hindou: une spe -
cifciteé?’, in Pierre Baptiste and Thierry Zéphir 
(eds.), Tresors d’art du Vietnam: la sculpture 
du Champa V–XV siècles , pp. 109–121 . Paris: 
Museée des arts asiatiques Guimet.
. 2008. ‘The Dancers and Musicians of Tra 
Kieu: Pedestal or Base?’, in Elisabeth A. Bacus, 
Ian C. Glover, and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), 
Interpreting Southeast Asia’s Past: Monument, Image and Text: Selected Papers from the 10th International Conference of European Associa -
tion of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 
2, pp. 46–54 . Singapore: NUS Press.
. 2018. ‘ Dvārapālas or Dh armap ālas?’, i n 
Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn Thắng, and Peter D. 
Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpiec -
es of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture ,  
pp. 180–181. Bangkok: River Books.
. 2019. ‘Đồng Dương Temple Iconography: 
Study of a Pedestal with Māra’, in Arlo Griffiths, 
Andrew Hardy, and Geoff Wade (eds.), Champa: 
Territories and Networks of a Southeast Asian 
Kingdom , pp. 343–353. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   330 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 333] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā331
Boisselier, Jean. 1963. La statuaire du Champa: Re -
cherches sur les cultes et l’iconographie . Paris: 
École française d’Extrême-Orient. 
Bower, Virginia and Colin Mackenzie. 2004. ‘Polo: 
The Emperor of Games’, in Colin Mackenzie 
and Irving Finkel (eds.), Asian Games: The Art 
of Contest,  pp. 283–303. New York: Asia Society. 
Brown, Julian Richard. 2013. The Field of Ancient 
Cham Art in France: A 20th Century Creation. 
A Study of Museological and Colonial Contexts 
from the Late 19th Century to the Present . PhD 
thesis, SOAS, University of London.
Brown, Robert L. 1996. The Dv āravat ī Wheels of 
the Law and the Indianization of South East 
Asia . Leiden: Brill. 
Chemburkar, Swati. 2018. ‘Royal Court Dance 
Lintel’, in Tr ần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn Thắng, 
and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: 
Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham 
Sculpture , pp. 220–221. Bangkok: River Books. 
Claeys, Jean-Yves. 1927. ‘Fouilles de Tra Kieu’, Bul -
letin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 27: 
468–479. 
. 1929. ‘Fouilles a Tra-Kieu’, Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 28: 578–596. 
Cœdès, George. 1931. ‘Le piédestal de Trà Kiệu’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
31: 201–212. 
Dhar, Parul Pandya. 2018. ‘The Lives of Temples in 
Champa’, in Peter Sharrock, Tr ần Kỳ Phương, 
and Võ Văn Thắng (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: 
Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham 
Sculpture , pp. 57–63. Bangkok: River Books. 
. 2019. ‘Pride and Penitence of an Anti-He -
ro: Rāvaṇānugraha as Motif and Metaphor in 
India and Campa’, in Arlo Griffiths, Andrew 
Hardy, and Geoff Wade (eds.), Champa: Terri -
tories and Networks of a Southeast Asian 
Kingdom , pp. 355–373. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient .
Glover, Ian C. 2005. ‘Avant le Champa: fouilles 
à Tra Kieu et Go Cam, Province de Quang 
Nam, Centre Vietnam, 2000–2003’, in Pierre 
Baptise and Thierry Zéphir (eds.), Tresors d’art 
du Vietnam: la Sculpture du Champa, Ve–XVe 
siècles , pp. 14–21. Paris: Reunion des Musées 
Nationaux. Golzio, Karl-Heinz. 2004. Inscriptions of Camp ā: 
based on the editions and translations of Abel 
Bergaigne, Étienne Aymonier, Louis Finot, 
Édouard Huber and other French scholars and 
of the work of R.C. Majumdar. Newly presented, 
with minor corrections of texts and translations, 
together with calculations of given dates. Aachen: 
Shaker Verlag.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2013. ‘The Problem of the Ancient 
Name Java and the Role of Satyavarman in 
Southeast Asian International Relations Around 
the Turn of the Ninth Century CE’, Archipel 
85: 43–81.
Griffiths, Arlo, Amandine Lepoutre, William A. 
Southworth, and Thanh Phan. 2012. Văn Khắc 
Chămpa Tại Bảo Tàng Điêu Khắc Chăm - Đà 
Nẵng: The Inscriptions of Camp ā at the Museum 
of Cham Sculpture in Đà Nẵng. Hồ Chí Minh: 
VNUHCM Publ. House. 
Guy, John. 1998. ‘The Kosa Masks of Champa: New 
Evidence’, in Wibke Lobo and Stefanie Reimann 
(eds.), Southeast Asian Archaeology 1998, pp. 
51–60. Hull: Centre for South-East Asian Studies, 
University of Hull. 
. 2004. ‘Late Tang Ceramics and Asia’s In-
ternational Trade’, in Treasures from the Be -
litung Shipwreck, pp. 56–73. Singapore/New 
Zealand: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute and 
Seabed Explorations New Zealand Ltd.
. (ed.). 2014. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist 
Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia. New York 
and New Haven: The Metropolitan Museum of 
Art and Yale University Press.
. 2018. ‘Śaiva Ritual: Liṅgakośa and Mukha-
kośa in Champa’, in Trầ n Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn 
Thắng, and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy 
in Stone: Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum 
of Cham Sculpture, pp. 89–95. Bangkok: River 
Books. 
Holcombe, Charles. 1999. ‘Trade-Buddhism: Mar-
itime Trade, Immigration, and the Buddhist 
Landfall in Early Japan’, Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 119/2: 280–292.
Iyer, Alessandra. 1998. Prambanan: Sculpture and 
Dance in Ancient Java: A Study in Dance Ico -
nography. Thailand: White Lotus Press. 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   331 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 334] ---
Mya Chau332
Lajonquière, Étienne L. 1901. Atlas Archéologique de 
l’Indochine: monuments du Champa et du Cam -
bodge. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Legge, James and Faxian. 1965. A Record of Buddhis -
tic Kingdoms: Being an Account by the Chinese 
Monk Fa-Hsien of His Travels in India and 
Ceylon, A.D. 399–414, in Search of the Buddhist 
Books of Discipline . New York: Paragon Book. 
[First edition Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1886]
Lemire, Charles. 1894. ‘Aux Monuments Ancien des 
Kiams (Excursion Archaologique en Annam)’ 
Le Tour du Monde (Paris, 1860) LXVII: 401–416.
Levin, Cecelia. 2008. ‘Recasting the Sacred Heroes: 
A New Discovery of Sculptural Epic Narration 
from Ancient Champa’, in Elisabeth A. Bacus, 
Ian C. Glover, and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), 
Interpreting Southeast Asia’s Past: Monument, 
Image and Text: Selected Papers from the 10th International Conference of European Associa -
tion of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 
2, pp. 85–99 . Singapore: NUS Press. 
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2011. ‘Ornaments 
with Meaningful Motifs: The Necessity of 
Genital Protection’, in Ruth Barnes, Emma 
Natalya Stein, and Benjamin Diebold (eds.), 
Gold in Early Southeast Asia: Selected Papers 
from the Symposium Gold in Southeast Asia, 
Yale University Art Gallery, 13–14 May 2011 ,  
pp. 89–123. New Haven: Yale University South -
east Asia Studies. 
Manguin, Pierre-Yves. 2010. ‘Pan-Regional Re -
sponses to South Asian Imputus in Early South -
east Asia’, in Bérénice  Bellina (ed.), 50 Years of 
Archaeology in Southeast Asia: Essays in Honor 
of Ian Glover , pp. 171–181 . Bangkok: River Books. 
Murphy, Stephen. 2019. ‘Cultural Connections and 
Shared Origins between Campā and Dvāravatī: 
A Comparison of Common Artistic and Archi -
tectural Motifs, ca 7th–10th Centuries CE’, in 
Arlo Griffiths, Andrew Hardy, and Geoff Wade 
(eds.), Champa: Territories and Networks of a 
Southeast Asian Kingdom , pp. 303–322. Paris:  
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Mus, Paul. 1928. ‘Études indiennes et indochinoises: 
L’inscription à Valmiki de Prakaçadharma 
(Tra Kieu)’, Bulletin de l’École française d’Ex-
trême-Orient 28: 147–152.Nguyễn Hoàng Hương Duyên. 2018. ‘Polo Players’, 
in Trần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn Thắng, and Peter D. 
Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces 
of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculpture ,  
pp. 206–208. Bangkok: River Books. 
Phạm Hữu Mý. 1995. ‘Đọc Lại Nội Dung Bệ Thờ 
Trà Kiệu Kí Hiệu 22.2 Tại Bảo Tàng Điêu Khắc 
Chăm-Đà Nẵng’, Khảo Cổ Học 2: 84–88.
Pignon, Isabelle. 1998. ‘Le site de Chien Dang’, 
Lettres de la SACHA 4 (December): 3–8.
Polkinghorne, Martin. 2007. ‘Artists and Arteliers: 
Khmer decorative lintels of the 9th–10th centu -
ries’, Udaya: Journal of Khmer Studies 8: 219–241.
Przyluski, Jean. 1929. ‘Un chef-d’oeuvre de la sculp -
ture chame: le piedestal de Tra Kieu’, Revue des 
Arts Asiatiques 6: 89–93.
. 1933. ‘ Pradakṣiṇa  et prasavya  en Indochine’, 
in Wilhelm Gampert and Otto Stein (eds.), 
Festschrift Moriz Winternitz, pp. 326–332 . 
Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz. 
Romain, Julie. 2015. Courtly Culture and Visual Art 
in India: Ramayana Reliefs on Hindu Temples 
of the Sixth to Eighth Century . PhD dissertation, 
University of California, Los Angeles. 
Schweyer, Anne-Valérie and Piemmettawat Paisarn. 
2012. Ancient Vietnam: History, Art, and Ar -
chaeology . Bangkok: River Books.
Scott, James C. 2009. The Art of Not Being Governed: 
An Anarchist History of Upland Southeast Asia . 
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Sharrock, Peter, Tr ần Kỳ Phương and Võ Văn 
Thắng (eds.). 2018. Vibrancy in Stone: Master -
pieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum of Cham Sculp -
ture. Bangkok: River Books.
Southworth, William and Ruth Prior. 2010. 
‘History and Archaeology of Tra Kieu’, in 
Bérénice Bellina (ed.), 50 Years of Archaeology 
in Southeast Asia: Essays in Honor of Ian Glover ,  
pp. 183–194. Bangkok: River Books. 
Souza, George Bryan and Jeffrey S. Turley. 2016. 
‘An Account of the Customs of the Kingdom 
of Champa’, in The Boxer Codex: Transcrip -
tion and Translation of an Illustrated Late 
Sixteenth-century Spanish manuscript concern -
ing the Geography, Ethnography and History 
of the Pacific, Southeast Asia and East Asia ,  
pp. 677–680. Leiden and Boston: Brill. 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   332 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 335] ---
The Colossal Trà Kiệu Pedestal in Campā333
Thompson, Ashley. 2016. Engendering the Buddhist 
State: Reconstructions of Cambodian History . 
New York: Routledge.
Tingley, Nancy. 2009. ‘The Pedestals of Champa’, 
Arts of Asia 39/6: 104–111.
Trần Kỳ Phương. 2000. ‘The Wedding of Sita: A 
Theme from the Ramayana Represented on the 
Tra Kieu Pedestal’, in Marijke J. Klokke (ed.), 
Narrative Sculpture and Literary Traditions in 
South and Southeast Asia , pp. 51–58. Leiden: 
Brill. 
. 2018. ‘Lotus Pedestal’, in Tr ần Kỳ Phương, 
Võ Văn Thắng, and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), 
Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng 
Museum of Cham Sculpture , pp. 128–129. 
Bangkok: River Books.
Trần Kỳ Phương and Rie Nakamura. 2012. ‘My Son 
and Po Nagar Nha Trang Sanctuaries: in regard 
to the Cosmological Dualist Cult of Champa 
Kingdom (Central Vietnam)’, in Alexandre 
Haende (ed.), Old Myths and New Approaches—
Interpreting Ancient Religious Sites in Southeast 
Asia , pp. 268–280 . Clayton, Vic.: Monash Asia 
Institute, Monash University. Tu, Grace Chiao-Hui. 2018. ‘Sinitic Transfers 
into Cham Art’, in Tr ần Kỳ Phương, Võ Văn 
Thắng, and Peter D. Sharrock (eds.), Vibrancy 
in Stone: Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng Museum  
of Cham Sculpture , pp. 79–88. Bangkok: River 
Books. 
Wade, Geoff. 2011. ‘The “Account of Champa” in 
the Song Huiyao Jigao’, in Tr ần Kỳ Phương and 
Bruce M. Lockhart (eds.), The Cham of Vietnam: 
History, Society, and Art , pp. 138–167. Singapore: 
NUS Press. 
Wolters, O.W. 1999. History, Culture, and Region in 
Southeast Asian Perspectives . Ithaca, NY: South -
east Asia Publications, Southeast Asia Program, 
Cornell University. [Originally published by the 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore, 
1982]
Zéphir, Thierry. 2018. ‘Cornerpieces: Rearing  
and Rampant Lions’, in Peter Sharrock, Trầ n 
Kỳ Phương, and Võ Văn Thắng (eds.), Vi -
brancy in Stone: Masterpieces of the Đà Nẵng 
Museum of Cham Sculpture, p. 189. Bangkok: 
River Books. 
09_CreSouthV1_8P_11Feb22.indd   333 11/2/22   3:48 PM

--- [Page 336] ---
Chapter 10
On the Chronological Interrelationship between 
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā: 
The Hòa Lai and Po Dam Sites 
Trần Kỳ Phương
introduction
In recent years, there have been several impor-
tant new findings of Cam inscriptions. Dated 
inscriptions in particular have provided rele -
vant information about the contemporary temple 
groups on the basis of a comparison with their art 
styles. As Cam temple sites are rarely associated 
with dated inscriptions, these new findings help to 
clarify some issues related to the temples’ dating. 
The new dates suggested here for relevant instances 
of Cam temple architecture will also provide a 
new comprehension of the relationships between 
the art of the Cams and their neighbours, namely 
pre-Angkorian Cambodia and Central Java.
on art styles of cam temple sites 
Henri Parmentier was the first to list and classify 
Cam temple architecture in his classic two-volume 
book Inventaire descriptif des monuments čams  
de l’Annam, published in 1909  and 1918 . In his 
work, Parmentier (1918 : 19–20) categorized Cam 
architecture into six forms, as follows:
1.  ‘L’art primitif’: Mỹ Sơn A1 style, around the 
early 7th century, along with the Po Nagar 
Northwest  tower and the Po Nagar main 
tower (restored in 813  and 817  CE);
2.  ‘L’art cubique’: Hòa Lai style, around the 
early 8th century, along with Mỹ Sơn F1 
tower and Po Nagar West tower (third half 
of the 9th century);
3.  ‘L’art mixte’: Đồng Dương style, around the 
year 875 CE;4.  ‘L’art classique’: Tháp Bạc Tower style, 
around the 11 th century, along with Mỹ 
Sơn E4 tower;
5.  ‘L’art dérivé’: Po Kloong Garai style, around 
the 12th century, along with Mỹ Sơn B1 
(1114  CE), Mỹ Sơn G1 ( 1157  CE), Po Kloong 
Garai (early 14 th century), and Po Rome 
(second quarter of the 17 th century);
6.  ‘L’art pyramidal’: The style of Po Nagar Nha 
Trang South tower and Bằng An tower (900  
and 910 CE), Po Nagar South tower (1145  
CE), and Yang Prong tower (early 14 th 
century). 
Parmentier’s classic work has been the basis for 
all subsequent research works on Cam art. It was 
not until 1942  that the classification and arrange-
ment of Cam temples according to artistic styles 
was initiated by Philippe Stern in his work L’art 
du Champa et son évolution. In this work, Stern 
applied the method of analysing decorative fea-
tures of art works, known as ‘motif analysis’ or 
‘decorative pattern analysis’ (analyse de motif), as 
was proposed by French art historians in the 20 th 
century to study South Asian arts. That method 
has brought positive results to the dating of ar-
tistic works by analysing patterns/motifs in detail 
and comparing them with each other, defining 
and classifying them according to each style (art 
stylistics), and finally comparing the development 
of each style in relation to its historical chronology 
in order to discern the probable period of the as-
sociated architectural works (Williams 1982 : 6–7). 
Accordingly, Stern suggested the following relative 
chronology for the art styles of Cam temples:
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   334 11/2/22   3:53 PM

--- [Page 337] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā335
1.  Ancient style, as in the Mỹ Sơn E1 temple
 
and pedestal. This is assumed to belong to 
the 8th century by comparison with Damrei 
Krap temple of Khmer art on the moun-
tain of Phnom Kulen in Siem Reap province, 
even though Stern was uncertain about the 
date of that site (Stern 1942 : 69);
2.  Hòa Lai style, as in the Hòa Lai group with 
three towers, which was built in the first half 
of the 9th century. This style is related to 
the art of the Damrei Krap Khmer temple, 
because that temple is related to a Khmer in -
scription that must have postdated the cor-
onation of King Jayavarman II on Phnom 
Kulen, which is traditionally ascribed to the 
year 802 CE. Stern also thought that the 
Damrei Krap brick temple was built by Cam 
artisans in Khmer territory (Stern 1942 : 63);
3.  Đồng Dương style, inheriting complex and 
twisted pattern motifs of the Hòa Lai style 
and developing into a unique motif of Cam 
art. This motif, which has a wormlike shape 
(vermiculé) with deep carving, was applied 
in the decoration of temple architecture as 
well as sculpture during this art period. This 
style is related to the inscription of King 
Indravarman II erected at the Buddhist 
monastery in situ in 875  CE. Accordingly, 
the chronological frame of the Đ ồng Dương 
style can be attributed to the period from 
the second half of the 9th century to the first 
quarter of the 10 th century; 
4.  Mỹ Sơn A1 style: a major style, beginning
 
with the Khương Mỹ group of three towers. 
Stern highlighted the pattern motifs influ-
enced by Khmer and Javanese arts in this 
tower group, and the direct succession of the 
pattern units from the ‘vermicular pattern’ 
of the Đồng Dương style in Khương Mỹ. He 
proposed to date the Khương Mỹ group to 
shortly before 920  CE, which would also 
coincide with the starting point of Mỹ Sơn 
A1 style. In the Mỹ Sơn A1 style, a common 
architectural decoration was foliage pattern 
units with an uninterrupted S-shaped layout, 
which created airy and gentle beauty, quite 
differently from the typical ‘vermicular 
pattern’ of the Đ ồng Dương style;5.  Transition style between the Mỹ Sơn A1 
and Bình Định styles, following a historical 
event related to the transfer of the capital 
of Campā  from Quảng Nam to Bình Định 
around the year 1000  CE. Stern suggest-
ed that this style began in the early 11 th 
century;
6.  Bình Định style, defined on the basis of 
the relationship between Cam and Khmer 
arts. Stern suggested that the date of the 
Dương Long group of three towers and the 
Hưng Thạnh tower (Twin Towers) was in 
the late 12 th century or early 13 th century. 
He pointed out the profound influence of 
Khmer decorative art on those two tower 
groups, which he thought were influenced 
by Angkor Wat. Stern also proposed a 12 th 
century dating for the other tower groups 
in Bình Định province, such as Cánh Tiên, 
Thủ Thiện, and Thố c Lốc. According to him, 
most of the towers of the transitional period 
were dateable to the 11 th century, for in-
stance, the Bình Lâm tower in the early 11 th 
century and the tower group of Tháp Bạc in 
the late 11 th century;
7.  Late style. Stern proposed a date between 
the late 13 th century and the early 14 th 
century for the Po Kloong Garai temple, and 
the 17th century for the Po Rome temple. 
The above style and date classification table sug -
gested by Stern has been widely used in research 
works related to the history of Cam and other 
Southeast Asian arts.1 In the 1990 s, with funding 
from the Toyota Foundation, together with Shige-
eda Yutaka, I systematically carried out research on 
the Cam temple architecture in Central Vietnam. 
The research results were published in a catalogue 
entitled Champa Oukoku no iseki to bunka (‘Ruins 
1. For example, the study of Cam sculpture La statu -
aire du Champa  by Jean Boisselier, published in 1963, is 
mainly based on Stern’s classification of art style, although 
Boisselier supplemented the division with shorter periods 
within each style and slightly modified some of the dates. 
Stern’s classification of art style has widely been applied 
by Vietnamese researchers in their works, such as Tr ần Kỳ 
Phương  (1988), Ngô Văn Doanh (1994), and Nguyễn H ồng 
Kiên (2000).
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   335 11/2/22   3:53 PM

--- [Page 338] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương336
and Culture of the Kingdom of Campā ’) on the 
occasion of Cam art exhibition to commemo -
rate the 20 th anniversary of The Toyota Founda-
tion, 1974 –1994 , in Tokyo in 1994  (Shigeeda and 
Momoki 1994 ); and in a co-authored work entitled 
Champa iseki: Umi ni mukatte tatsu  (‘Cam ruins: 
Standing toward the Ocean’) published in Japan in 
1997  (Trần Kỳ Phương ad Shigeeda 1997 ).
In these works, Shigeeda set up a table com -
paring the ground plans of Cam temples in each 
style on the basis of the drawings by Parmenti -
er. This comparison shows the differences and 
similarities of each Cam architectural group for 
each building and style (Shigeeda and Momoki 
1994). Shigeeda also proposed a different means 
of architectural classification for Cam art in each 
complex on the basis of research conducted on 
the following Cam temple structures (Shigeeda 
and Momoki 1994: 9–64):
1.  Mỹ Sơn complex: including the temple 
groups of Mỹ Sơn site, the dates range 
from the 7 th to the 13 th or 14 th centuries. 
The complex represents the process of Cam 
temple architecture from the early to the late 
periods in terms of architectural concept, 
structural technique, and decorative pro-
grammes and patterns;
2.  Quảng Nam complex: including the temple 
groups in Quảng Nam province, such as 
Đồng Dương, Khương Mỹ, Chiên Đàn, and 
Bằng An, the dates range from the late 9th 
to the 13th centuries. The complex includes 
various art styles and architectural forms of 
Buddhist and Brahmanical temples;
3.  Bình Định complex: including the temple 
groups in Bình Định province, such as Bình 
Lâm, Tháp Bạc (Silver tower), Dương Long, 
Hưng Thạnh, Cá nh Tiên, Thủ Thiện, Thố c 
Lốc, and Tháp Nhạn, in Tuy Hòa city, Phú 
Yên province, the dates range from the 11 th 
to the 13 th centuries. The complex repre-
sents the full development of Cam temple 
architecture in terms of the trans-regional 
art exchanges in m ainland Southeast Asia;
4.  Po Nagar complex: including the temples at 
the Po Nagar Nha Trang site in Nha Trang city, Khánh Hòa province, the dates range 
from the 8th to the 13 th centuries. The 
complex represents the art mixture between 
the North and South Campā;
5.  Phú Hài complex: including the temple 
groups of Phú Hài, Po Dam and Hòa Lai 
in Bình Thuận and Ninh Thuận provinc-
es, the dates range from the 8th to the 9th 
centuries. The complex represents the early 
temple groups, which clearly displays the 
features of temple architecture within the 
same art period; 
6.  Po Kloong Garai complex: including the 
temple groups of Po Kloong Garai and Po 
Rome in Ninh Thuận province, the dates 
range from the 13 th to the 17 th centuries. 
The complex represents the features of Cam 
temple architecture of the late period. 
The development of Cam construction techniques 
is clearly shown in the six temple complexes listed 
above and also reveals features of each art style in 
every complex, which are influenced by, and syn-
cretized to, each other. The classification of Shige-
eda shows a process of gradual development of 
Cam temple construction techniques, which were 
clearly manifested in each complex, and also in -
dicates an interactive influence between art styles 
and regional architecture. For the dating of each 
site, Shigeeda basically applied Stern’s chrono -
logical table, though he supplemented and mod-
ified it on the basis of  his findings on the temple 
structural techniques implemented at each site. 
Since, in many cases, the sites have passed through 
phases of restoration, one cannot uniquely rely on 
the method of analysing pattern motif (analyse de 
motif) on those vestiges.
Therefore, to study Cam temple architecture we 
can fruitfully apply both classifications, i.e. Stern’s 
‘art style’ and Shigeeda’s ‘temple complex’, which 
complement each other. By approaching the minor 
architectural details of construction techniques 
along with decorative programmes and/or orna -
mented pattern units, and then by analysing and 
comparing them according to certain correlations 
existing among the monuments, we can try to find 
a solution for the relative date of a given temple.  
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   336 11/2/22   3:53 PM

--- [Page 339] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā337
the new findings of cam dated 
inscriptions and their relationship 
with temple architecture 
Over the years, many archaeological excavations 
have been carried out for restoration purposes at 
the sites of Hòa Lai, Po Dam, Tháp Bạc, Bình Lâm, 
Dương Long, Khương Mỹ, and Chiên Đàn. These 
excavations have unearthed many sandstone sculp-
tural works and some dated inscriptions. Most of 
these inscriptions, either in Sanskrit or Old Cam, 
have been translated into English and French by 
Arlo Griffiths and his colleagues in the context of 
the project ‘Corpus of Cam Inscriptions’ of the 
École française d’Extrême-Orient in Paris.2 In this 
chapter I present some dated inscriptions discov-
ered at the temple sites of Hòa Lai and Po Dam. I 
will compare the date provided in the inscriptions 
2. http://isaw.nyu.edu/publications/inscriptions/campa 
(last accessed 6 May 2018). with the coterminous temples and analyse their 
artistic features, especially those that are specific and typical, and then propose a possible date for 
each temple and style. In doing so, firstly I intro-
duce the main sacred architectural sites built in the 
Pāṇḍuraṅga region, including the Phú Hài group, 
for which the relationship between inscriptions 
and temples will be discussed (Fig. 10.1).
Phú Hài Group (Fig. 10 .2)
The southern part of the Campā kingdom(s) con-
stituted the Pāṇḍuraṅga state, which includes 
the urban areas of Phan Rang, Phan Rí and Phan 
Thiế t currently belonging to Ninh Thuận and Bình 
Thuận provinces. The lowland of the provinces is 
the driest area in Central Vietnam; however, it also 
owns the rich sources of fresh water. Historically, 
this land occupied the prosperous ports located 
at the estuaries of the Dinh river in Phan Rang, Fig. 10.1: Map of the Cam temple groups in Ninh Thuận and Bình Thuận provinces. (Drawing: 
Trần Kỳ Phương)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   337 11/2/22   3:53 PM

--- [Page 340] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương338
Fig. 10.2: Ground  plan and section drawings of Phú Hài group. Trần Kỳ Phương 
and Shigeeda’s drawing based on Parmentier’s. (Tr ần Kỳ Phương and Shigeeda 
1997: 167)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   338 11/2/22   3:53 PM

--- [Page 341] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā339
Fig. 10.3: Small tower and South tower of Phú Hài group. Part of the South tower was 
restored in the late 1990s. (Photo : Trần Kỳ Phương, 2014)
Fig. 10.4: Technique of corbelling inside the small 
tower of Phú Hài group. The top of the tower is 
finished by a square stone (still intact). (Photo : Trần 
Kỳ Phương, 2014)the Lũy river in Phan Rí and the Cà-ty river in 
Phan Thiế t, which provided fresh water and local 
forest luxury products to the commercial ships 
travelling along the maritime trade routes (South-
worth 2012: 66– 70). A number of inscriptions be-
longing to the 8th to 9 th centuries were found in 
this region (Golzio 2004: 38– 58). The early temple 
groups of Phú Hài, Po Dam and Hòa Lai were 
inventoried, described, photographed, drawn and 
studied by Parmentier in his classical works on 
the Cam temple architecture (Parmentier 1909: 
29–36, 50– 58, and 98– 110; 1918: 533– 540, and 
566). These temple groups were also analysed on 
the aspect of art stylistics by Stern (1942: 4–6, 36, 
and 69; P1 . 4a; 5e, f, j; 11a, b; 17a; 24a, b; 25a, b; 
33a, b, c; 47a).
Among them, the temple group of Phú Hài or 
Phố Hài,3 which is called Po Sah Inư  by the Cam 
people, was erected on a small hill nearby the Phan 
Thiế t estuary (Figs. 10.3  and 10.4 ). Its three build-
3. Parmentier (1909: 28–36) named this temple group as 
Phố Hài. The term 
of ‘Phú Hài’ or ‘Phố Hài’ transliterates 
into Vietnamese the place name of ‘Pajai’ in Cam language, 
and can thus reflect variations in pronounciation, for in -
stance, ‘Pajai’ = Phố  Hài, Phố  Hải, Phú Hài, Phú Hải, and so 
on. It is now officially called Phú Hài by the local authorities. 
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   339 11/2/22   3:53 PM

--- [Page 342] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương340
Fig. 10.5: The ground  plan of Phú Hài temple group after the archaeological excavation in 1995. (Photo courtesy of 
Nguyễn Hồng Kiên) 
ings were named as tour principale, petit sanctuaire, 
et tour nord (‘principal temple, small sanctuary, 
and North temple’) by Parmentier (1909 : 29–36), 
who also regarded this temple group as belong-
ing to l’art primitif du Cambodge (‘the primitive 
art of Cambodia’) and not to Cam art (Parmenti-
er 1918 : 566). According to Stern (1942 : 63), Phú 
Hài is probably mi-khmèr mi-cham (‘half-Khmer 
half-Cam’). Meanwhile, Michel Jacq-Hergoualc’h 
(2001 : 50–56) argues that the principal temple of 
the Phú Hài site has a close artistic relationship 
with the Wat Keo temple in the Chaiya district, 
Surat Thani province in Peninsular Thailand, for 
instance, with respect to its architectural form and 
decorative details.
During the early 1990 s, the Institute of Mon -
ument Conservation of Ministry of Culture and 
Cultural Department of Bình Thuận province 
had investigated and excavated the bases of these 
temples. Especially significant was the excavation 
conducted from November 1994  to January 1995 , 
in which archaeologists revealed several stages of 
brick structures built through different periods of 
time (Nguyễn Xuân Lý and Nguyễn Hồ ng Kiên 
1995 : 100–111) (Fig. 10.5 ).
The Phú Hài temple group, along with the  
Po Dam and Hòa Lai, were classified as ‘Phú  
Hài complex’ by Shigeeda and Momoki (1994: 
55–59), on the basis of their own typical features  
of ground plan design, decorative pattern, and 
structural technique (Trần Kỳ Phương and Shige-
eda 1997: 158–172).
Hòa Lai Group (Fig. 10.6)
The Hòa Lai temple group is located in the hamlet 
of Ba Tháp, Bắc Phong commune, Thuận Bắc dis-
trict, Ninh Thuận province. This site formerly 
consisted of three temples, but the Middle tower 
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   340 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 343] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā341
Fig. 10.6: Ground plan and section drawings of Hòa Lai group. Trần Kỳ Phương and 
Shigeeda’s drawing based on Parmentier’s. (Tr ần Kỳ Phương and Shigeeda 1997: 169)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   341 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 344] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương342
was completely destroyed by bombs at the end of 
the Vietnam War in 1975 ; furthermore, the recent 
restorations resulted in a clumsy and confused 
copy of the original structures. Since the Hòa Lai 
group of three towers was first described in detail 
by Parmentier (1909 : 98–108) in the early 20 th 
century and developed throughout the century, 
we primarily have to rely on the description and 
photographs provided by that French scholar to 
study the art of this group of temples.
The Hòa Lai group played a significant role 
in the evolution of Cam art. On the basis of their 
architectural form, decorative programme, and 
type of pattern, Parmentier classified them as Art 
cubique; meanwhile, Stern called them Style de 
Hòa Lai. One also notes a difference between the 
two scholars about the dating of this group.
The remarkable features of the Hòa Lai group, 
particularly the Middle and North towers, are the 
stout and solid form, large pilaster, thick cornice, 
three double false-doors formed by two overlap -
ping layers—the inner big and the outer small—, 
two large arches (grande arcature) above, a long 
and narrow vestibule, and the square ground 
layout. The decorative programme of the Middle 
and North towers is expressed with a linking 
design style of similar twisted, thick, and sinuous 
units of pattern; this is a distinctive and unique 
type, which is easy to contrast with other types of 
patterns in the Cam architectural decorative rep-
ertoire. Another remarkable feature of the Middle 
and North towers is that there are sixteen brick 
Garuḍa holy birds on the cornices. In the Hòa Lai 
group, sandstone corner ornaments (pièce d’accent 
en grès), which are a common decorative feature 
in Cam architecture from the Đ ồng Dương period 
onwards, have not appeared yet.
Parmentier’s classification of the South and 
Middle towers as ‘cubic art’ perhaps originated 
from the impression created by the structure of 
the tower: the upper part of the tower body is often 
figured to be a bigger tower-base to support the 
roof layers of the tower formed into overlapped 
cubes. Parmentier dated the Hòa Lai group to 
about the 8th–9 th century (1918 : 19–22, 536–40). 
His estimate was based on the comparison with 
other Cam ruins linked to epitaphs (1918 : 1–4). 
Although Parmentier’s approach was later criti-cized and replaced by a new approach proposed 
by Stern (1942 : 92–98), the date he suggested  for 
the Hòa Lai group is still valid.4
As I mentioned above, when rethinking Cam 
art history, Stern (1942 : 4, 8–9, and 47 –48) chose a 
specific monument to identify each typical artistic 
period; thus, he replaced the expression ‘cubic art’ 
of Parmentier with ‘Hòa Lai style’. Stern agreed 
with Parmentier that each of the Hòa Lai towers 
was built separately, the South tower having been 
possibly built the earliest and its architectural 
form and technical structure being followed by 
the Middle tower and then the North tower, and 
he proposed a date between the middle of the 8th 
century and the first half of the 9 th century (1942 : 
61–62). Remarkably, Stern assumed a similarity 
between the Hòa Lai group and Damrei Krap 
temple on Phnom Kulen mountain in Cambodia.5 
4. On the basis of the architectural and decorative parts 
of the M
iddle and South towers, Parmentier (1918: 10–13) 
proposed a chronological framework for sites later than the Mỹ Sơn F1 tower, related to the C. 99 stele, which is 
undated but was probably engraved around the early 8th 
century, for it features the name of King Vikrāntavarman II, ca. 709–732 CE (Golzio 2004: 25–28), thus earlier than 
Đồng  Dương Buddhist monastery complex, related to the  
C. 66 stele dated back to 875 CE. However, he had a dif -
ferent view on the design and decorative patterns of the 
North tower, which he thought to be a clumsy copy of the 
Middle tower, and indicated a later date for it: ‘Nous ne 
serions pas étonnés même qu’il s’agisse là d’une copie de 
l’époque archaïsante, c’est-à-dìre du XII siècle’ (1918: 538).
5. ‘On a ain
si l’impression d’un sanctuaire construit et 
décoré par un architecte čam, sanctuaire dans lequel au -
raient été insérés des éléments de décor Khmers en grès, in -
discutablement sculptés par des sculpteurs khmèrs suivant 
la tradition khmère’ (Stern 1938: 137). In December 2007, 
I carried out field research at the Damrei Krap temple on 
the Phnom Kulen mountain, and noticed that the temple 
had two architectural phases: (1) the initial phase, char -
acterized by brick architectural elements of the pre-Ang -
korian period, from the 9th century and earlier, which is 
similar to the structural design of brick temples in the early 
period of Cam architecture; (2) the later phase, in which the temple was restored in the Angkorian period, in the 
11th–12th centuries, when the sandstone lintel, door-pillars, 
and doorframes of the entrance to the hall were added. In 
particular, the thick sandstone doorframe was designed 
with cross tenons in four corners, which was very popular 
in stone temple architecture during the Angkorian period 
(personal communication with Shigeeda Yutaka at Mỹ Sơn 
Sanctuary in May 2005; and with Mao Sokny of APSARA 
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   342 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 345] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā343
On the basis of a detailed study of that temple, 
he noticed its similarities to Cam architecture, 
especially to the Hòa Lai group. Relying on his 
reference about the date of Damrei Krap temple, 
which was fairly later than the enthronement of 
King Jayavarman II on Phnom Kulen, tradition -
ally ascribed to the year 802  CE, he estimated that 
the Hòa Lai site was built slightly later than the 
Damrei Krap temple, and came to the conclusion 
that the temple must date from the first half of the 
9th century (Stern 1942 : 63). However, I maintain 
that Stern exaggerated the connections between 
Prasat Damrei Krap and the Hò a Lai temples and 
that whatever the exact date of Damrei Krap may 
be, that date has no bearing on the dating of the 
Hòa Lai temples.
Later, in his research work on Cam sculpture, 
Boisselier accepted Stern’s opinion that the three 
towers of the Hòa Lai group were built later than 
Damrei Krap temple in Cambodia, as well as Par-
mentier’s conclusions about their successive build -
ing stages. However, he claimed that the date of 
Damrei Krap temple was a little later, in the second 
quarter of the 9 th century; and the date he pro -
posed for Hòa Lai temples was also in accordance 
with previous proposals, namely the third quarter 
of the 9 th century (Boisselier 1963 : 84). 
We now return to Stern’s analysis of the Hòa Lai 
group’s architectural and decorative programmes 
after which he named the ‘Hòa Lai style’ in the 
history of Cam art. As in the other styles, Stern 
mainly relied on the analysis of pattern design 
displayed on large arches (grande arcature) and 
Authority at the temple of East Mebon in Siem Reap in 
July 2015). For this reason, Stern suggested that the brick 
architectural elements of the temple were built by Cam 
artisans, while the stone parts by Khmer artisans. In fact, 
upon detailed comparison, the Damrei Krap temple is not 
similar to the temples of Hòa Lai group. For example, the 
brick decorative Garuḍa birds on the cornices, the design 
of pillars, the false doors, the tympanums as well as the 
structure of the upper parts are features that differentiate 
the two temple complexes from each other. Furthermore, 
there are various Khmer brick temples that are coterminous 
with the Damrei Krap temple on Phnom Kulen, which 
suggests that this temple was not necessarily built by Cam 
architects. Be this as it may, both temple groups were built 
on the basis of a common temple architectural scheme 
found in the entire Southeast Asian region at that time. big pilasters to characterize each artistic style. In 
the Hòa Lai group, he mainly took interest in the 
Middle and North towers, whose decorative pro-
grammes were richer than the South tower, which, 
he remarked, presented some curious and original 
aspects (Stern 1942 : 15). The type of decorative 
pattern to which Stern referred is characterized 
by units appearing in twisted, thin, and sinuous 
shapes, intentionally repeated to create a rhythm 
of decoration for the prominent features of the 
temple, such as large arches and pilasters. The 
large arches above the double false doors of the 
Middle and North towers are unique because they 
are formed by two overlapping blocks, the inner 
high and the outer low. This is a type of unique 
‘double arch’ arranged with similar linking pattern 
units, which do not appear in other styles. As for 
the pillars, these uninterrupted pattern units are 
only expressed in the middle part and not on both 
sides to create an airy beauty for the walls without 
any overuse of decoration patterns. This style is 
completely different from that of the temples of 
Đồng Dương.
In 2006, while carrying out restoration work, 
the Ninh Thuận Provincial Museum discovered a 
92 cm-high stele together with its base at the Hòa 
Lai group, in between the Middle and North towers. 
This important inscribed stele was translated and 
published by Griffiths and Southworth (2011). The 
Hòa Lai stele, dating back to the year 700 Śaka (778 
CE), provides the main text of the Sanskrit inscrip-
tion; its base, 25.5 cm high, which was carved with 
two lines of poetry (śloka), bears a later date, i.e. 760 
Śaka (838/839 CE). These two different dates are 
closely related to the period in which the Hòa Lai 
temple group was built (Southworth 2012: 68–70). 
The stele mentioned the dominance of Śaiva beliefs, 
the matrilineal ideology in inheritance, and the 
local tradition of producing Sanskrit stelae initiat-
ed under the reign of Satyavarman, the great king 
who erected important stelae in Pāṇḍuraṅga and 
was praised by his successors in the inscriptions 
found at the Cam royal sanctuary of Po Nagar in 
Nha Trang, formerly Kauṭhāra state (Griffiths and 
Southworth 2011: 17).
In order to understand the correlation between 
the two dates (778  and 838 /839 CE) of the stele as 
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   343 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 346] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương344
well as of the stele’s base and the Hòa Lai temples, 
we can compare them with the architectural de -
velopment of the three temples, and then infer a 
probable construction date for each building. If 
the three temples of the Hòa Lai group were built 
at three different times, which temple was corre-
sponding to the date of the stele and the stele’s 
base? To answer this question, we must examine 
and compare the order of construction of each 
temple, so as to be able to advance an appropriate 
date for each corresponding construction work.
Judging from the construction technique, ar -
chitectural form, and decorative programmes, as 
shown by previous authors, the South tower is 
considered to have been built the earliest, fol -
lowed by the Middle tower and finally the North 
tower. We see that the structure of the South tower 
is short and big, whereas the temple base (sou -
bassement) is high; the double false door is huge 
and thick with two layers, the inner bigger than 
the outer, on which two rectangular frames with 
dual contours were carved. There is no decorative pattern whatsoever on the large arches and the 
tower walls. Notably, on both sides of each false 
door two miniature towers without details were 
carved; these miniature towers form a decorative 
motif known as ‘flying palace’, which was com -
monly sculpted on the Khmer brick temples of 
Sambor Prei Kuk, dated to the 7 th–8 th centuries 
(Nakagawa and Shimoda 2003 : 120, 229; Tranet 
1997 : 239–253) (Fig. 10.7). In Cam architecture, the 
motif of the ‘flying palace’ only appeared in the 
South tower of the Hòa Lai sanctuary; therefore, 
it is the only evidence we have to compare with 
the neighbou ring arts, especially Khmer art of the 
8th century. In the light of the more simplified 
ground plan structure and programme as well 
as the simpler architectural and decorative pro -
gramme of the South tower in comparison to the 
other two towers, researchers agree that the South 
tower is the earliest temple of the Hòa Lai group 
(Parmentier 1918 : 32; Stern 1942 : 910; Boisselier 
1963 : 84; Shigeeda and Momoki 1994 : 57, 97–98; 
Trần Kỳ Phương and Shigeeda 1997 : 170–171).
Fig. 10.7: The South tower of Hòa Lai group, restored in the early 2000s. (Photo : Trần Kỳ Phương, 2014)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   344 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 347] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā345
Due to the complete destruction of the Middle 
tower during the war, I did not have the opportu-
nity to carry out research in situ, but could only 
approach the site through the works of previous 
scholars. As mentioned above, Parmentier assert-
ed that the Middle tower was built after the South 
tower. The salient feature of the Middle tower is its 
double false doors with large arches decorated with 
the thick and sinuous patterns described above, and especially the image of dvārapālas (temple 
guardians/door tutelary deities) standing inside 
the false doors above the temple base. This is the 
first appearance of this motif in Cam temple archi -
tecture. Another architectural decorative feature 
of the Middle tower is the feet of pilasters deco -
rated with small arches whose centre features a 
kīrtimukha/kāla figure and two patterns of ribbons 
dropping down from both sides. This motif reveals 
an artistic relationship between Central Java and 
Campā (Baptiste 2014 : 72–73). Under the small 
arch there are human images standing on the 
arc-shaped or star-shaped (flower?) patterns 
(Fig. 10.8). That feature can be compared with the 
small arches on the facade of Mỹ Sơn E1 pedes -
tal, showing a stylistic continuity between the two 
artworks (Stern 1942 : 15–16). In comparing the 
Middle tower and the South tower, we can see that 
the ground-plan layout as well as the architectur-
al decoration of the Middle tower is much more 
complex and sophisticated than the South tower. 
All these features indicate that it must have been 
built later than the South tower.
According to Boisselier, two dvārapāla bas-re-
liefs carved on two false doors of the Middle tower 
(Fig. 10.9) evoke a similarity with the dvārapā -
la bas-reliefs of the Chót Mạt tower of Khmer 
pre-Angkorian art period built in Tây Ninh prov-
ince, Vietnam, as well as the human figures of 
Candi Bhīma on Dieng Plateau in Central Java, In -
donesia. Boisselier also analysed and compared the 
dvārapālas’ sampot with loose broad flaps falling 
to the knees, its spiral hair, and its round earrings 
with some sculptural works of Mỹ Sơn, such as the 
hair and clothing of the demon king Rāvaṇa on the 
tympanum of Mỹ Sơn F1 temple or of the dancing 
Śiva represented on the tympanum of Mỹ Sơn C1 
temple, and the sampot of the standing Gaṇeśa 
statue of Mỹ Sơn E5 . Then, Boisselier (1963 : 84–85) 
asserted that the two dvārapāla bas-reliefs of the 
Middle tower belonged to the extended period of Mỹ Sơn E1 style, dating to about the third quarter 
of the 9th century—being almost contemporary in 
period with the Đ ồng Dương style, which began 
around 875 CE. 
The North tower (Fig. 10.10 ) has the largest 
ground- plan layout of the group, and its decora-
Fig. 10.8: Small arch carved with kīrtimukha/kāla  mask 
on the foot of the pilaster, the Middle tower of the Hò a 
Lai group. (Stern 1942: Planche 25a)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   345 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 348] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương346
Fig. 10.9: Bas-relief of standing dvārapāla  in the false 
door of the Middle tower of Hòa Lai group. (Stern 
1942: Planche 53b) 
Fig. 10.10: The North tower of Hòa Lai group, restored 
in the early 2000s. (Photo : Trần Kỳ Phương, 2014)
tive programme includes similar unit patterns to 
the Middle tower. On this basis, Parmentier sug-
gested it was a reproduction of the Middle tower. 
However, if we observe closely, we can realize 
that two large arches on the double false door of the North tower are longer and slimmer than the 
arches of the Middle tower; and, instead of a kīr-
timukha/kāla figure, a round flower was carved 
at the centre of the small arches on the lower end 
of pillars. The most significant decoration of the 
North tower is the image of a god sitting on a 
tiger carved on the western false door (Parmenti-
er 1918 : 107), possibly a god of the Śaiva pantheon  (Fig. 10.11 ).6 Having been built as the last among 
the towers of the Hòa Lai group, as demonstrat -
ed in previous studies, the North tower, with its 
highly developed architectural structure and dec-
orative programme, is considered to belong to the 
final stage of the Hòa Lai style (Stern 1942 : 91).
6. The Śaiva icon related to the tiger appeared in Cam art 
at Mỹ Sơn, the Śaiva sanctuary of the Cam royal family, 
more specifically in the round standing statue of Gaṇeśa 
at Mỹ Sơn E5 with a tiger-head on his sampot ; this statue 
belongs to the late period of Mỹ Sơn E1 style, in the middle 
of the 8th century, and thus precedes the Hòa Lai style 
(Boisselier 1963: 47–48; Baptiste 2014: 71–72). Also, another 
carving of the Mỹ Sơn E1 pedestal realistically depicts a 
tiger in an attacking pose. Tiger images were popular in 
Cam sculpture during this art period, thus suggesting that 
Śaiva beliefs were prevalent throughout the kingdom at 
that time. 
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   346 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 349] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā347
Through the investigation and comparison 
described above, I tend to assign the date of Hòa 
Lai stele (778  CE) to the construction time of 
the Middle tower on the basis of the following 
reasons:
1.  The Middle tower of the Hòa Lai group 
manifests an innovative type of temple 
ground- plan layout and architectural dec -
oration in the early artistic period;
Fig. 10.11: Western false-door in the North tower of Hòa Lai group 
(original) expressing the big arch with twisted, thick and sinuous 
pattern units of Hòa Lai style, and the image of a god sitting on a tiger. 
The upper part with the Garuḍa on the left corner of the false door was 
restored. (Photo : Trần Kỳ Phương, 2014)
2.  This architectural work was broader and 
bigger than previous works, which is evi -
dence of higher development in construc-
tion techniques;
3.  The architectural decorative programmes 
were diverse, with new and innovative 
pattern units, creating a different aesthetic 
tendency from the previous period and in-
fluencing subsequent buildings;
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   347 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 350] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương348
4.  The Middle tower shows the close relation-
ship with neighbou ring sites, such as those 
of Cambodia (Stern 1942 : 63–64; Boisseli -
er 1963 : 84–85), Java (Baptiste 2014 : 72–73; 
Griffiths 2014 : 297), and Southern Thailand 
or Peninsular Malaysia (Jacq-Hergoualc’h 
2001 : 50–56). This reflects a contemporane-
ous cultural interaction in the whole region 
through trading connections by land and 
waterways (Trầ n Kỳ Phương 2013 : 47–51; 
2017 : 4–6).
Based on the content of the Hòa Lai stele, Griffiths 
and Southworth (2011 : 296) reasoned that the god 
mentioned in the text, Ādideveśvara, who was as-
sociated with goddess Durgā, was worshipped in 
the Middle tower; and that this stele was erected 
to commemorate the groundbreaking ceremony 
or the inauguration of this temple. Therefore, the 
important information provided by the Hòa Lai 
stele about the religious activities under the con-
temporary reign of King Satyavarman falls within 
the period of Cam temple architecture that the 
Middle tower typically exemplifies. Moreover, 
Baptiste (2014 : 73, fig. 64 ) connected the date of 
the Hòa Lai stele (778  CE) with the Middle tower 
by analysing the influence of Javanese art, espe-
cially the Kāla image, in the decorative patterns 
of this temple. Thus, it can be safely assumed that 
the date of 778  CE is likely to fall within the range 
of the construction period of the Middle tower.
If 778 CE is considered as contemporaneous 
to the period of construction of the Middle tower, 
then the North tower is likely to be attributed 
to 838/839 CE—the date inscribed on the base of 
the Hòa Lai stele: as argued by Stern, this tower 
belonged to the latest stage of the Hòa Lai style 
(1942 : 91). Thus, the Middle tower may have been 
built by King Satyavarman in 778 CE, as described 
in his stele; later, during the reconstruction of the 
North tower, King Vikrāntavarman had a new ste -
le-base made in 838 /839 CE to support the original 
stele erected by King Satyavarman (Griffiths and 
Southworth 2011 : 295, 301).7
Interestingly, the period of sixty years sepa-
rating these two dates shows us the full process 
7. Southworth (2012: 69) suggests that the Middle tower 
was o
riginally built in 778 CE and restored in 838/839 CE. of evolution of the architectural forms and dec -
orative programmes of the Hòa Lai group of 
temples. This is especially evident in the pattern 
units expressed on the large and small arches over 
the false-door systems of the Middle tower and 
North tower. Subsequently, this type of pattern 
was strikingly developed in a short timespan in 
the Đồng Dương style, around 875  CE.
Po Dam Group (Fig. 10.12)
The Po Dam temple complex is located in the 
Tuy Tịnh commune, Tuy Phong district, Bình 
Thuận province, at a distance of approx. 60  km 
from the Hoa Lai temple group. It consists of 
six architectural works named by Parmentier as 
follows: (1 ) Central tower, (2 ) Northeast tower, (3) 
Northwest tower, (4 ) South tower, (5 ) Southeast 
tower, and (6 ) Southwest tower. The Northeast 
and Northwest towers were completely destroyed 
(Parmentier 1909 : 50–58; Stern 1942 : 15–16; Trầ n 
Kỳ Phương and Shigeeda 1997 : 158–161). Po Dam 
is the only temple complex known in Cam archi-
tecture whose axis is oriented to the southwest. 
The axis of this tower group is likely to relate to 
the location and layout of a temple complex built 
on a narrow area of a low hill next to the mountain 
slope; however, it could possibly reflect specific 
features of Cam beliefs.8 
8. The direction of the main gate of Cam temples ( kalan ) 
did not always resemble the Indian prototype, i.e. facing 
east, but depended on the terrain where the temple was 
built. In Mỹ Sơn, for example, the temple-towers were 
built in a valley symbolizing a maṇḍala ; thus, the main 
gate of the kalan  opens out to both the eastern and western 
directions, similar to those of the temples in Central Java in 
the early period (Klokke 1994: 76–77). In the case of the Po 
Dam group, the southern direction slanting to the west is an 
ideal direction for the main gate of a kalan , because it faces 
a vast field ahead; moreover, as the sea-coast in this region 
slants to the south, then the temple could be regarded as 
facing the sea. In addition, the Po Dam group possibly had a 
close relationship with the Phú Hài group if it is considered 
in the light of the Cam concept of dichotomous universe. 
This includes such opposites as male–female, mountain–
sea, father–mother, areca–coconut, and so on ( Trần Kỳ 
Phương and Nakamura 2012: 274– 275). Accordingly, the 
Po Dam group is likely to belong to the mountain-father 
dichotomy; meanwhile, the Phú Hài group belongs to the 
sea-mother dichotomy.
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   348 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 351] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā349
Fig. 10.12: Ground plan and section drawings of Po Dam group. Tr ần Kỳ Phương 
and Shigeeda’s drawing based on Parmentier’s. (Tr ần Kỳ Phương and Shigeeda 
 1997: 161)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   349 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 352] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương350
In general, the Po Dam group displays the 
architectural form that was popular in the early 
period of Cam temples. This is expressed by the 
low size of the towers, the narrow interiors, and 
the small square ground plans with short vesti -
bules. The Po Dam temples were built successively 
within a short period of time—perhaps only a few 
decades. The Cam temples that are similar to this 
kind of architectural type include the small tower 
of Phú Hài, Mỹ Sơn C7 ( Trần Kỳ Phương 1988 : 
36–37), and the Mỹ Khánh tower.9
In terms of architectural form, ground plan, 
and decorative programme, as well as the cor -
belling in the interiors, we can see that the South, 
Southeast and Southwest towers of the Po Dam 
group (Fig. 10.13 ) were built the earliest because 
the decorative programmes on the walls of these 
towers are simple, with a big pilaster without dec-
orative pattern in the middle. There is no false 
door and arch, and the cornice is formed with 
straight edges. Also, a comparison can be carried 
out between the corbelling in the interior of the 
Southeast tower and the small tower of Phú Hài. 
This is a tower with a square summit, possibly 
closed by a square block of stone, now lost, similar 
9. The Mỹ Khánh tower, which was discovered in April 
2001, is located in the Mỹ Khánh hamlet, Phú Diên 
commune, Phú Vang district, Thừa Thiên Huế province, 
about 30 km southeast of Huế  city. This temple was buried 
under the sand, about 120 metres from the sea edge. This 
small temple, with an east-facing door, was entirely built 
of brick, without any trace of stone. There were only brick 
walls, without corbelling. The roof of the temple was pos -
sibly covered with light material (thatch, wood, or tile) as 
archaeologists have not found any traces of stone materials 
around the tower. Its three false doors are decorated with 
big arches without any patterns, and there are standing 
human images, very roughly carved, inside the false doors. 
Radiocarbon dating (C14) yields a date of 750 ± 40 CE 
for the Mỹ Khánh tower (Trịnh Nam Hải 2001: 81). The 
architectural form of the Mỹ Khánh tower is quite similar 
to the South, Southeast, and Southwest towers of the Po 
Dam group, especially the detail of curved edges of the 
two walls connecting with the main hall of the Southwest tower. This reflects the earliest period of Cam temple ar -
chitecture, characterized by a simple structural technique 
and simplified decorative program me, a low small shape, 
and a narrow interior ( Trần Kỳ Phương 2011: 288– 291). The 
radiocarbon dating of Mỹ Khánh tower mentioned above 
is a valuable reference in comparison with the date of the inscription newly found in the Po Dam group, i.e. 710 CE.to the one of the small tower of Phú Hài (Fig. 10.4) 
(Trần Kỳ Phương 2011 : 292). It can also be com-
pared with a minor detail in the vestibule of the 
Southwest tower and the Mỹ Khánh tower, i.e. two 
corners of the wall along the entrance to the ves-
tibule, which connect with the sanctum of these two towers, and which were sharpened into two 
curved edges. From this detail it may be inferred 
that they were possibly built simultaneously. That 
unique feature also appears  in the small temple of 
Mỹ Sơn C7 , the North tower of the Phú Hài group, 
and in the Middle tower of the Hòa Lai group.10 
This is a significant feature of Cam temple archi-
tecture during the early period (Trầ n Kỳ Phương 
2011 : 288–289).
The Central tower of the Po Dam group  
(Fig. 10.14 ) belongs to a more highly developed 
stage of construction technique and architectur -
al decoration, as manifested in the rectangular 
ground plan with long vestibule. It is the largest 
sized temple and was built the latest among the 
other towers of the group. A series of three single 
false-doors expressing the big arch (grande arca-
ture) appear in this temple;11 two of them having 
been lost, only the big arch of the western false door 
remains. The layout of the decorative programme  
on the big arch on the western false door of the 
Central tower includes thick and sinuous pattern 
units hanging down with four circular flowers 
overlapping both sides of the pilaster at the end; 
the contour on the top of the pilaster is adorned 
with two double 8-shaped pattern units linking a 
double rectangular frame. Especially important is 
a unique pattern on the eastern cornice of the ves-
tibule expressing a kīrtimukha/kāla figure, which 
10. The two edges of the walls connecting the vestibule 
with the sanctum were curved, possibly in order to create a 
convenient entrance to the sanctum because of the narrow 
vestibule. Further references on this feature can be found 
in the plan drawings made by Parmentier (1909: Planches I, 
VI, XVI, LXXXIV) of the North tower of the Phú Hài group, 
the Southwest tower of the Po Dam group, the Middle tower 
of the Hòa Lai group, and the Mỹ Sơn C7 tower.
11. Single arches with only one layer were placed on 
single false doors; meanwhile, double arches were placed 
on double false doors at the Hòa Lai group. This type of 
double arches gave the temple a solid and stout beauty, cre -
ating the impression of a stronger and more imposing form.
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   350 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 353] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā351
Fig. 10.13 : The Southeast and the Southwest towers of Po Dam group. The Southwest tower was 
restored in 2014 while the Southeast tower is still intact. (Photo : Trần Kỳ Phương, 2014)
Fig. 10.14 : Western side of the Central tower of Po Dam group (original) expressing the false door 
with big arch, decorated with pattern units in the mid-period of Hòa Lai style. The roof of the tower 
was restored in the early 2000s. (Photo : Trần Kỳ Phương, 2014)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   351 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 354] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương352
is the only one appearing in the Po Dam group  
(Fig. 10.15 ).12 Upon close inspection, we can see 
that the arcade of the Central tower is short and 
big, and that the decorative design includes a 
layout of thick and sinuous pattern units similar 
to the arcade of the Middle tower of the Hòa Lai 
group, although smaller in size. Thus, it is possi-
ble that the patterns of the Central tower of the 
Po Dam group appeared simultaneously with the 
Middle tower of the Hòa Lai group. Another im-
portant detail is that the kīrtimukha/kāla figure on 
the cornice of the vestibule of the Po Dam Central 
tower can be compared to the same figure carved 
on the small arcade of the Hòa Lai Middle tower, 
12. Parmentier (1909: 56) called it a tête de lion aux yeux 
cornu
s (‘head of a lion with horned eyes’). in contrast to the absence of any kīrtimukha/kāla  
figure in the North tower of the Hòa Lai group. 
When making the ground- plan comparison, Shi -
geeda dated the Central tower of Po Dam to the 
same period as the Central tower of the Hòa Lai 
group, i.e. around the late 8 th century (Shigeeda 
and Momoki 1994 : 97–98). Thus, the date of the 
Central tower of Po Dam group can be around the 
last quarter of the 8th century (ca. 778  CE), which 
is similar to the date of the Middle tower of the 
Hòa Lai group as I mentioned above. This in spite 
of Stern’s (1942 : 70) suggestion that the Po Dam 
Central tower could have been built in the late Hòa 
Lai style on the basis of a comparison of the pattern 
design on the big arcade of the Po Dam Central 
tower to the North tower of the Hòa Lai group.13 
Recently, a slab-stone inscription 70  × 80 cm in 
dimension, inscribed with two-verse 3–4 cm high, 
was discovered by the Center for Archaeological 
Studies of the Southern Institute of Social Sciences 
in Ho Chi Minh City on 20  September 2014  while 
they were carrying out an archaeological excava-
tion at the Po Dam group (Fig. 10.16 ). The location 
of the slab-stone inscription is about 4 metres away 
from the southwest corner of the Central tower, 
next to the slope of the mountain.14 Griffiths has 
interpreted the content of this inscription through 
a photograph sent from Dr Thành Phầ n of the 
National University of Ho Chi Minh City right 
after its detection. The short inscription, in San-
skrit śloka metre, only refers to a date, possibly 
related to a certain temple, i.e. Thursday, the 6th 
of the second month of the Śaka year 631  (710 CE). 
The whole translation of Griffiths is as follows: ‘In 
13. Stern probably did not take notice of what are two 
distinct modules, the one with the short and stout big 
arch of the Central tower of the Po Dam group and the 
other with the long and oblong arch of the North tower of 
the Hòa Lai group. He appears to have only compared the 
similar pattern units expressed on both modules.
14. This information was provided by archaeologist 
Nguyễn Khánh Trung Kiên, who conducted the excavation 
at the Po Dam site during September and October 2014 
(personal communication with Nguyễn Khánh Trung Kiên 
on 10 February 2015; see also Nguyễn Khánh Trung Kiên 
and Nguyễn Xuân Lý 2016: 730–731). Another reference to 
the finding of this inscription is in Nguyễn Hoàng Bách 
Linh’s MA thesis (2016: 95–96).Fig. 10.15 : kīrtimukha/kāla  mask (original) decorated 
on the cornice of the Central tower of Po Dam group. 
(Photo : Trần Kỳ Phương, 2014)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   352 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 355] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā353
the Śaka year marked by (1 ) Earth, (3 ) Fires, (6) 
Flavors, in the waxing fortnight of Phalguṇa, on 
the third, a Friday’.15 
If so, which tower of the Po Dam group corre-
sponds to the date inscribed on the slab-stone? Ac-
cording to the analysis presented above, the date of 
the Central tower of the Po Dam group is possibly 
contemporary with the Middle tower of the Hòa 
Lai group, that is around the year 778  mentioned 
in the Hòa Lai stele; therefore, the year 710  CE of 
the Po Dam inscription is not appropriate for the 
Central tower. Accordingly, the year 710  CE can 
only be matched with the South, Southeast, and 
Southwest towers, which are works belonging to 
the early period, characterized by a simple struc-
tural style as analysed above. Thus, I suggest that 
the date 710 CE mentioned in the Po Dam inscrip-
tion is closely related to the early temple group 
of this site, including the South, Southeast, and 
Southwest towers, mainly because the period from 
710 to 778  CE, lasting around seventy years, can 
be regarded as the necessary duration to advance 
the techniques of brick temple construction that 
started in the early stage of Cam architecture. The 
development of the temple structures can clearly 
be seen from the simpler and smaller works of 
the Phú Hài group or of the South, Southeast, and 
Southwest towers of the Po Dam group (Figs. 10.3 
15. Arlo Griffiths, email dated 12 February 2015. and 10.13 ),16 as well as of the South tower of the 
Hòa Lai group. This development goes from sim-
plistic decorative programmes to the larger and 
more sophisticated Central tower of the Po Dam 
group, or of the Middle tower as well as the North 
tower of the Hòa Lai group. This exemplifies the 
course of the development of Cam temple archi-
tecture in the Southern region of the Cam king -
dom(s) during the 8 th and 9 th centuries.
conclusion
The discovery of inscriptions at the temple sites of 
Hòa Lai and Po Dam makes an important contri-
bution to the study of the stages of development of 
16. In 2013 and 2014, archaeological excavations were 
conducted at Po Dam by the Center for Archaeological 
Research, Southern Institute of Social Sciences in Ho 
Chi Minh City and Bình Thuận Provincial Museum. The 
result of the two excavations unearthed the remains of 
previous brick buildings including several smaller shrines, 
maṇḍapa s, gopura s, stairways, and so on (Fig. 10.17). Ac -
cording to Nguyễn Khánh Trung Kiên, through the excava -
tions, archaeologists revealed that the base of the Southern 
tower was built as overlapping the bases of the Southeastern 
and Southwestern towers. Thus, one can argue that the 
Southern tower was built at a slightly later period than 
the Southeastern and Southwestern ones (Nguyễn Khánh 
Trung Kiên and Nguyễn Xuân Lý 2016: 730–731; Nguyễn 
Hoàng Bách Linh 2016: 62–63). 
Fig. 10.16: Newly found inscription in Po Dam group in September 2014. (Photo courtesy of Nguyễn Khánh 
Trung Kiên, 2014)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   353 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 356] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương354
Fig. 10.17 : The ground  plan of Po Dam temple group after the archaeological excavation 
during 2013–2014. (Courtesy of Nguyễn Hoàng Bách Linh 2016: 172, fig. 9)
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   354 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 357] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā355
Cam art history. These documents provide com -
pelling evidence, complementing new perceptions 
on the dating of Cam temples in the context of two 
architectural classifications, the ‘art style’ classi -
fication of Stern and the ‘complex architecture’ 
classification of Shigeeda. These inscriptions help 
us to determine the appropriate date of the two 
temple groups of Hòa Lai and Po Dam, and further 
explore the development of each architectural 
complex by comparing them with such neigh-bouring arts as those of pre-Angkorian Cambodia 
and Central Java (Stern 1942 : 63–64; Baptiste 2014 : 
72–73; Griffiths 2014 : 57). On that basis, a general 
chronological framework, in which these artis -
tic developments had interactive influences, can 
be proposed to establish the correlation between 
art and architecture and the religious and socio-  
political background of Campā and its neighbour -
ing regions in Southeast Asia.
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   355 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 358] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương356
Table 10.1 : 
Comparative chronological table of the temple architectures in the Southern region of Campā based on Hòa Lai 
style (Philippe Stern) or Phú Hài complex (Shigeeda Yutaka)
Name of 
architectural site Name of templeTemple-towers with 
similar designDate Note
Po Dam South tower Mỹ Khánh tower; 
Mỹ Sơn C7 tower.Around the year 
710 CE (or the first 
quarter of the 8th 
century).The earliest architectural 
work of the temple complex. 
During this artistic period, 
there was the dissemination 
of construction technique 
between the Southern and 
Northern regions of the Cam 
kingdom(s).
Southeast tower The small tower of 
Phú Hài.Around the year 710  
CE (or the second 
quarter of the 8th 
century).The corbellings of the two 
towers are similar. 
Southwest tower Around the year 710  
CE (or the second 
quarter of the 8th 
century).
Central tower The Middle tower of 
Hòa Lai group.Around the year 778  
CE.
Hòa Lai South tower Before the year 778  
CE or the third 
quarter of the 8th 
century.
Middle tower The Central tower 
of Po Dam group.Around the year 778  
CE.
North tower Around the year 
838/839  CE. The latest architectural work of 
this temple complex or of the 
Hoa Lai art style. 
Phú Hài
(Po Sah Inư)Small tower The Southeast tower 
of Po Dam group.Around the year 
710 CE (or the first 
quarter of the 8th 
century).One of the earliest architectural 
works applied the technique 
of corbelling; a square stone 
still remains on top of the 
arcade inside the tower. This 
is possibly the best evidence 
to learn about the historical 
development of the technique 
of corbelling in Cam temple 
structure. 
North tower After the year 710  
CE (or the second 
quarter of the 8th 
century).The North tower and the South 
tower of Phú Hài group were 
built between 710 –778  CE.
South tower Before the year 778  
CE (or the second/
third quarter of the 
8th century).Possibly contemporary with 
the South tower of Hòa Lai 
group.
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   356 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 359] ---
Newly Found Inscriptions and the Temple Architecture of Campā357
Acknowledgments
The author would like to express his gratefulness 
to Nguyễn Hồ ng Kiên, Nguyễn Khánh Trung Kiên, 
and Nguyễn Hoàng Bách Linh for providing the 
pictures and drawings of Phú Hài and Po Dam 
temple complexes; to Shigeeda Yutaka for his 
comments on Cam temple architecture; to Arlo 
Griffiths for his translation of the Po Dam inscrip-
tion; to William Southworth for the discussions on 
the date of Po Dam and Hòa Lai temples; and to 
Nguyễn Thanh Xuân, Mai Bui Linh, Nguyễn Thị 
Tú Anh, Peter Sharrock and Andrea Acri for their 
help to translate and/or edit the English version 
of this chapter; as well as to the two anonymous 
reviewers for their valuable comments. 
References
Baptiste, Pierre. 2014. ‘Early Cham Art: Indigenous 
Styles and Regional Connections’, in John Guy 
(ed.), Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture 
of Early Southeast Asia, pp. 69–73. New York: 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 
Boisselier, Jean. 1963. La Statuaire du Champà: 
recherches sur les cultes et l’iconograpghie. Publi -
cations de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
54. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Golzio, Karl-Heinz. 2004. Inscriptions of Campā. 
Aachen: Shaker Verlag.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. ‘Early Indic Inscriptions 
of Southeast Asia’, in John Guy (ed.), Lost 
Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early 
Southeast Asia, pp. 53–57. New York: The Met-
ropolitan Museum of Art. 
Griffiths, Arlo and William Southworth. 2011.  
‘Étude du corpus des inscriptions du Campà-II. 
La stèle d’installation de Sri Ādideveśvara: Une 
nouvelle inscription de Satyavarman trouvée 
dans le temple de Hoà Lai et son importance 
pour l’histoire du Pāṇḍuraṅga ’, Journal Asia-
tique 299/1: 271– 317.
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, Michel. 2001. ‘A propos de 
transferts de formes communs au Campā et 
au Panpan (péninsule Malaise) au IXe siècle’, 
Arts Asiatiques 56: 45–60.
Klokke, Marijke. 1994. ‘On the Orientation of 
Ancient Javanese Temples: The Example of Candi Surowono’, in Paul van der Velde (ed.), 
IIAS Yearbook 1994, pp. 73–86. Leiden: Insti-
tution of International Asian Studies (IIAS). 
Nakagawa Takeshi and Shimoda Ichita (eds.). 2003. 
Sambor Prei Kuk: The Flying Palaces of the 
Towers. Sambor Prei Kuk Conservation Project. 
Tokyo: Department of the Culture and Fine 
Arts in Kompong Thom and Waseda University. 
Ngô Văn Doanh. 1994. Tháp cổ Chămpa: Sự thật 
và Huyề n thoại [ Ancient Temples of Champa: 
Reality and Legends], Nxb. Văn hóa-Thông tin, 
Hà Nội.
Nguyễn Hoàng Bách Linh. 2016. Di tích kiế n trúc 
Po Dam (huyện Tuy Phong, tỉnh Bình Thuận) 
[Architectural site of Po Dam ( Tuy Phong 
district,  Bình Thuận province)]. MA thesis 
on Archaeology [No.: 60-22-03-17], National 
University of Ho Chi Minh City, School of Hu -
manity and Social Sciences, Ho Chi Minh City.
Nguyễn Hồng Kiên. 2000. ‘Đề n tháp Champa’ 
[‘Champa temple towers’], Kiế n Trúc [ Architec -
ture]  4/84: 49–52, Hội Kiế n Trúc Sư Việt Nam.
Nguyễn Khánh Trung Kiên and Nguyễn Xuân Lý. 
2016. ‘Bình diện tổ ng thể  khu tháp Po Đam, tỉnh 
Bình Thuận qua hai lầ n khai quật’ [‘The general 
ground-plan of Po Dam temple complex, Bình 
Thuận province, after the two archaeological 
excavations’], in Vietnam Institute of Archae-
ology, Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences 
(ed.), Những phát hiện mới về  khảo cổ  học năm 
2015 [New Archaeological Discoveries in 2015],  
pp. 730–731. Hanoi: Social Sciences Publishers.
Nguyễn Xuân Lý and Nguyễn H ồng Kiên. 1995. 
‘Phát quật khảo cổ học ở nhóm đề n-tháp Chăm 
Pô Shanư, Phan Thiế t’ [‘The archaeological 
excavation at the Cham temple-tower of Pô 
Shanư, Phan Thiế t City’], Đông Nam Á [South -
east Asia] 4/21: 100–111. 
Parmentier, Henri. 1909. Inventaire descriptif des 
monuments Cams de l’Annam: vol. I. Descrip-
tion des monuments. Publications de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient 11. Paris: Leroux.
. 1918. Inventaire descriptif des monuments 
Cams de l’Annam: vol. II. Étude de l’art Cam. 
Publications de l’École française d’Ex -
trême-Orient 11. Paris: Leroux.
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   357 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 360] ---
Trần Kỳ Phương358
Shigeeda Yutaka and Momoki Shiro (eds.). 1994. 
Artifacts and Culture of the Champā Kingdom 
(Catalogue). Tokyo: The Toyota Foundation.
Southworth, William. 2012. ‘Religious Architec -
ture and Irrigation in the Plain of Phan Rang’, 
in Haendel Alexandra (ed.), Old Myths and 
New Approaches: Interpreting Ancient Religious 
Sites in Southeast Asia,  pp. 263–283. Australia: 
Monash University Publishing.
Stern, Philippe. 1938. ‘Le Style du Kulên (décor 
architectural et statuaire)’, Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extr ême-Or
ient 38: 111–149. 
. 1942. L’art du Champa (ancien Annam) et 
son évolution. Musée Guimet, Études et docu-
ments d’art et d’archéologie, tome 3. Toulouse: 
Les Frères Douladoure.
Trần Kỳ Phương. 1988. Mỹ Sơn trong lịch sử nghệ 
thuật Chăm [ Mỹ Sơn in the History of Cham 
art], Nxb. Đà Nẵng, Đà Nẵng.
. 2011. ‘The Integral Relationship between 
Hindu Temple Sculpture and Architecture: A 
New Approach to the Arts of Champa’, in Trầ n 
Kỳ Phương and Bruce M. Lockhart (eds.), The 
Cham of Vietnam: History, Society and Art , pp. 
277–299. Singapore: NUS Press.
. 2013. Crossing Boundaries – Learning from 
the Past to Build the Future: An Archaeological 
Collaboration between Cambodia, Laos and 
Vietnam. The Regional Center for Social Scienc -
es and Sustainable Development (RCSD), Re-
search Report No. 8 [57 pages], Chiang Mai 
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand. . 2017. ‘The Overland Trading Route between 
the Khmer Empire and the Champa Kingdoms: 
New Archaeological Findings in Northeast 
Cambodia’, NSC Highlights, News from the 
Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre #4, March–May 2017, 
pp. 4– 6. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Insti-
tute.
Trần Kỳ Phương and Rie Nakamura. 2012. ‘Mỹ 
Sơn and Pô Nagar Nha Trang Sanctuaries 
and the Cosmological Dualist Cult of the 
Champa Kingdom’, in Alexandra Haendel 
(ed.), Old Myths and New Approaches: Inter -
preting Ancient Religious Sites in Southeast Asia,  
pp. 267–280. Australia: Monash University 
Publishing.
Trần Kỳ Phương and Shigeeda Yutaka. 1997. 
Champā Iseki: Umi ni mukatte tatsu  [Champā 
Ruins: Standing Facing toward the Ocean]. 
Tokyo: Rengo Shuppan.
Tranet, Michel. 1997. Sambaur-Prei-Kuk: Monu-
ments d’Içanavarma (615-628). Phnom Penh: 
Travail d’Inventaire Finance par la Fondation 
Toyota.
Trịnh Nam Hải. 2001. ‘Kế t quả khai quật tháp Mỹ 
Khánh’ [Results of the Excavation at Mỹ Khánh 
temple], Tạp chí Thông tin Khoa học và Công 
nghệ [Bulletin of Information for Sciences and 
Technique] 3/33: 72–83, Sở Khoa học, Công nghệ 
và Môi trường Thừa Thiên-Huế .
Williams, Joanna G. 1982. The Art of Gupta India: 
Empire and Province. Princeton, New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press.
10_CreSouthV1_7P_11Feb22.indd   358 11/2/22   3:54 PM

--- [Page 361] ---
THE CONTRIBUTORS
Andrea Acri (PhD, Leiden University) is Maî-
tre de conférences/Assistant Professor in Tantric Studies at the École Pratique des Hautes Études (EPHE, PSL University) in Paris. Prior to joining the EPHE in 2016 , he has held various research 
and teaching positions in India, Singapore, Aus-tralia, and the Netherlands. He is a member of the editorial board of the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society and the Journal of Yoga Studies. His main research and teaching interests are Śaiva and Buddhist tantric traditions, Hinduism and Indi-an Philosophy, Yoga studies, Sanskrit and Old Ja-vanese philology, and the comparative religious history of South and Southeast Asia from the pre-modern to the contemporary period. His publi-cations include the monograph Dharma Pātañ-jala (Egbert Forsten/Brill 2011 ; Aditya Prakashan 
2017 ; Indonesian translation EFEO/Gramedia 
2018 ), as well as various edited volumes and arti-
cles in international academic journals.
Mya Chau (PhD, University of California, Los 
Angeles) currently teaches at Loyola Marymount University and Chapman University. In addition, she serves as a Research Assistant for the Schol-ars Program and Curatorial Department at the Getty Research Institute. Her research examines Buddhist visual culture and artistic exchanges in India and Southeast Asia. In 2015 , she was a 
Blakemore Freeman Fellow and recipient of the 2019  Women of Vision Award.
Swati Chemburkar is an architectural histo-rian whose work focuses on Southeast Asia, es-pecially Cambodia. She directs a postgraduate diploma course on Southeast Asian Art and Ar-chitecture at Jnanapravaha, Mumbai. Her main research interests are Khmer architecture of the Bayon period and Hindu-Buddhist Tantra tra-ditions of Cambodia. Her recent publications include ‘Pāśupata Sect in Ancient Cambodia and Champa’ (2017 ) with Shivani Kapoor; ‘Stupa to 
Mandala: Tracing a Buddhist Architectural De-velopment from Kesariya, Borobudur to Tabo’ (2018 ); and ‘Khmer Empire and Southeast Asia 
(8th to 14 th centuries)’ (2018 ).
Olivier Cunin is a qualified architect with a doctorate in architecture (2004 ). Since 1999 , he 
has been researching in situ the Bayon-style mon-uments (late 12 th century–early 13 th century) 
and other Khmer constructions by applying the methods of building archaeology, scientific tech-niques of archaeometry, and graphic computer technic. He has contributed to three books on the most emblematic monuments of the Bayon style: Banteay Chhmar (2005 ), the Bayon temple 
(2007 ), and the Preah Khan of Angkor (2011 ). He 
was a consultant for several international teams working at Angkor, such as the Swiss Conser-vation Project at Banteay Srei (2008 ), the World 
Monuments Fund at Angkor Wat (2012 –2014 ), 
the International Cooperation Team of the Korea Cultural Heritage Foundation at the Preah Pithu temples group (2017 ) and since 2019  to the AP-
SARA authority and the French Embassy at the West Mebon temple.
Shivani Kapoor
 is an independent research-
er focusing on the art history of pre-Angkorian 
Cambodia. She teaches in the Southeast Asian Art and Architecture Post-Graduate Certificate Course (SeAAA) at Jnanapravaha, Mumbai. She has presented at international conferences, and 
11_ContributorsV1_3P_17Jan22.indd   359 17/1/22   7:49 PM

--- [Page 362] ---
The Contributors360
lectured in the Diploma Course for Southeast 
Asian Art at SOAS (London) and other institu-tions, such as the Somaiya Center for Lifelong Learning in Mumbai. Her recent publications in-clude a co-authored a paper on the Pāśupata sect in Cambodia and Campā, in the catalogue Mas-terpieces of Da Nang Museum of Cham Sculpture  
(Vietnam), and a paper on the Iconography of Pāśupata ascetics in Cambodia, in the art journal Orientations (Hong Kong).
Yury Khokhlov
 (d. 2021 ) was  an independ-
ent art historian. He held a MA in Chemistry, a 
MA in Finance, and a MA in Chinese art history (Glasgow University). Khokhlov’s research in-terests included Tibetan and Chinese art history, Buddhist art of the Hexi Corridor, and the for-mation of Sino-Tibetan art in China. He regu-larly participated in international conferences related to these research areas, and was invited to give lectures to the students of the University of Glasgow and Christie’s Education Master’s pro-gramme in the Arts of China in 2013 –2017 .
Jinah Kim
 (PhD, UC Berkeley) is Professor of 
Indian and Southeast Asian Art at Harvard Uni-versity. Her research and teaching interests cover a broad range of topics, such as text-image rela-tionships, female representations and patronage, re-appropriation of sacred objects, and post-colo-nial discourse in the field of South and Southeast Asian Art. Her books include Receptacle of the Sacred: Illustrated Manuscripts and the Buddhist book cult in South Asia (2013 ) and Garland of Vi-
sions: Color, Tantra and a Material History of In-dian Painting ( 2021 ). In addition to her academic 
research, she is developing a digital humanities project on colour, which will serve as an online portal and a searchable, open database for exist-ing and future research on pigments. She has also co-curated an exhibition on Nepalese Buddhist Ritual Art and co-edited its catalog, Dharma and Puṇya: Buddhist Ritual Art of Nepal ( 2019 ).
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh is a part-time faculty member in the Department of Religions and Cultures at Concordia University in Montréal, Québec, Can-ada. She is finishing her doctoral dissertation on religious identity and practices among the Cam Ahier communities in contemporary Vietnam. Her investigation of Cam Ahier contemporary religion builds upon her previous research on the religions of mediaeval Campā. With a foun-dation in studies that included the history and philosophy of Hinduism and Buddhism in South Asia, she expanded her research area to embrace Southeast Asia, particularly with regard to ques-tions of the historical transmission and adoption of Indian culture, religion, and art in the region. It was her deep interest in Hindu-Buddhist reli-gious art, iconography, and sculptures of medi-aeval Campā that led her to engage with contem-porary Cam communities as a means of gaining a more complete understanding of Cam religion over time and space.
Tr
ần Kỳ Phương  is a former curator of the 
Danang Museum of Cham Sculpture, Vietnam 
(1978– 1999); currently he is a Senior Research 
Fellow with the Vietnam Association of Archae-ologists. His main research interests focus on the arts of Campā Kingdom, especially temple ar-chitecture and sculpture, as well as cultural area studies in Central Vietnam. He has published several books and articles in Vietnamese, English, and Japanese, including: Mỹ Sơn in the History of Cham Art ( 1988); Vestiges of Champa Civili-
zation (2008); Champ
ā Iseki: Umi ni mukatte 
tasu [Champ ā Ruins: Standing facing toward the 
Ocean]  (co-authored with Shige-eda Yutaku, 
1997); The Cham of Vietnam: History, Society
 
and Art (co-edited with Bruce Lockhart, 2011); Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces from the Danang Museum of Cham Sculpture (co-edited with Võ V. Thắng and Peter D. Sharrock, 2018).   
Peter D. Sharrock
 researches the art history 
of the Angkorian Khmer Empire and the Eso-
teric Buddhist and Hindu art of Maritime Asia from AD 800 to 1400 . He lectures at the SOAS 
University of London (the School of Oriental and African Studies), where he is a Project Board member of the School’s growing Southeast Asian Academic Art Programme (SAAAP). 
11_ContributorsV1_3P_17Jan22.indd   360 17/1/22   7:49 PM

--- [Page 363] ---
The Contributors361
Iain Sinclair  (PhD, Monash University) is an 
Honorary Research Fellow at the University of 
Queensland School of Historical and Philosoph-ical Inquiry. He is concurrently a Lecturer and Researcher at Nan Tien Institute, Wollongong. He has been a Visiting Fellow at the Nalanda-Sri-wijaya Centre, ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, and a Käte Hamburger Kolleg Fellow at the Centre for Religious Studies, Ruhr University Bochum. He studies the history of religion and art history us-ing primary sources in classical Asian languages. His published research focuses on Buddhist tan-tra, Sanskrit manuscripts, Newar Buddhism and the Buddhism of the Malay Archipelago.
11_ContributorsV1_3P_17Jan22.indd   361 17/1/22   7:49 PM

--- [Page 364] ---
Index
A
abhaya , 22, 25, 53–54, 104, 295
see also  fearlessness; unfearing
Abhayagiri Monastery, 130Abhayākaragupta, 62–63, 182–183abhaya-mudrā , 290–291, 294
Abhisamayamuktāmālā , 26
abhiṣeka, 4, 70, 84, 128, 130, 148, 254Abhiṣekavidhi, 153Acala, 20, 82, 110ācārya , 132, 148, 153, 156, 195, 197, 200, 202, 209, 
215–216, 222, 235, 240, 244, 246, 248–252, 255, 295
Ādi-Buddha, 126, 142Ādideveśvara, 348
Ādityavarman, King, 33–34, 38, 158–159Agni, 65, 232, 235, 243–244, 249, 251, 254–256agnyāgāra , 242–243, 248, 256
Airāvata, 65Ajaya, 20Ajit
āgama , 209, 243–2
44, 249, 257
Akṣobhya, 126, 131, 136, 138, 153–154, 157–159, 179Amar
āvatī, 5, 102, 10
4, 289, 291, 301–302
Amitābha, 11, 14, 20, 23, 30, 36, 64, 73, 83, 86, 110, 
114–115, 170, 179–184, 188
Amoghāṅkuśa, 37, 65Amoghapāśa, 2, 4, 9, 12–14, 16–20, 24–42, 58, 64, 
72, 91–92, 98–99, 117–118, 158
Amoghapāśahṛdaya, see Hṛdaya
Amoghapāśakalparāja (Kalparāja ), 12–18, 21, 
25–26, 32, 39
Amoghapāśamaṇḍala, 37, 39–41Amoghapāśapūjā, 35, 59Amoghapāśapūjāvidhi, 35Amoghavajra, 1, 3–4, 66, 68–71, 73, 75–78, 82, 86, 
88–89, 91, 94, 96, 100–101, 103–104, 109–112, 117, 127, 130, 147Amṛtakaṇikā, 31Ānandagarbha, 20, 131Anaṅgavarman, prince, 158Andhra, 77, 81, 215Angkor, 2, 5, 24, 128, 132–133, 136–137, 139–143, 
146–151, 153, 159, 167–168, 170–171, 173, 175, 177–178, 181, 183–184, 186–187, 192–196, 201, 204, 206–207, 209, 211, 215–216, 222–225, 228, 233, 236, 239–240, 246, 253, 255–256, 276–277, 281, 283, 285, 287, 313, 334, 342, 345, 355
Angkorian Buddhism, 170Angkor National Museum, 224Angkor Thom, 139, 142–143, 150–151, 170, 188, 
207, 255, 271, 285
Angkor Wat, 134, 138, 142, 149, 196, 200–201,  
204, 210, 211, 225, 229, 256, 275, 286, 319,  335
Anlong Veng District, 54An Lushan rebellion, 70, 130annex building, features of , 5, 222–223, 225, 
227–229, 231–239, 242, 244, 246, 250–253, 255–257, 262–288
Annual Report on Indian Epigraphy , 206
Anteṣṭividhi, 249anti-Buddhist campaign, 78Anuttarayogatantra, 183–184Apasm
āra, 291–294, 3
01
Apsara, 89, 150–151, 204, 292, 305, 316, 319, 323, 
327, 330, 342
archer with bow, iconography of (in Campā), 
316–319
ardhaparyaṅka , 137, 139, 141, 143
artisans, 3, 19, 33, 335, 343artistic corpus, 9, 16, 27, 37‘artistic mode’ , 4, 66, 68, 72–76, 78, 80, 84, 86, 91, 
98, 108, 113, 116–117
ārya , 32–33
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   362 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 365] ---
Index363
Āśaucad īpikā, 210
ash, an
d ritual, 5, 137, 139, 193–194, 196, 200, 222, 
238–242, 244–248, 250–251, 255–256
Asian Art Museum, San Francisco, 20, 177
Asian Art Society, 11Asian Civilisations Museum, 9, 149, 153Aśoka, emperor, 130āśrama , 132, 200, 204, 230–231, 233–234, 237, 
239–244, 250
aṣṭabāhu, 29
see also  Viṣṇu
Aṣṭamahābhaya Kliṅ, 39aṣṭamīvrata, 27, 36–38, 59aṣṭāṅgapraṇāma, 38Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā (AsP), 28, 157, 168, 
176, 181–185
asura , 23
Atharvavedapariśiṣṭa  (AVP), 240, 242, 244, 245, 
254, 256
Atikūṭa, 17Atiśa, 1, 3–4, 25, 27–28, 38, 126, 156–157Avadānamālā , 38
Avalokiteśvara, 2, 9–24, 28, 35, 37–40, 42, 72–73, 
75, 91, 98, 103–104, 117–118, 139, 142–143, 147, 149–151, 153, 167–172, 174, 176, 179–181, 187–188, 207, 288, 294
āyatana , 196, 240, 242, 246–2 47, 250, 255–256
BBahal temple, 131–132bahī , 25, 32
Guitaḥ Bah
ī, 31–32
Pūco Bah ī, 32
Thaṃ Bah ī, 19, 25–28, 32, 37–38
B
ali, 34–35, 39, 159, 215, 239, 245
Balin, 23balustrade window, 225, 232Bangkok National Museum, 21, 24, 54–55, 139Bangladesh, 28Bantaeng, 10–11, 54Banteay Chhmar, 22–23, 127, 142–143, 146–148, 
151, 183, 187, 200, 207, 209, 213, 223, 225, 235–237, 278, 281, 288, 319
Banteay Kdei, 150, 206, 223, 277, 287Banteay Samré, 137, 274, 286, 299Banteay Srei, 214, 225, 227, 233, 250, 255, 270–271, 
285, 299Ban That, 233Baphuon, 137, 139, 142, 200, 204Bat Cuṃ shrine, 132–133Bayon, 2, 127–128, 139–1 45, 148–1 53, 169, 188, 200, 
202–208, 211–2 14, 223, 225, 228–230, 234, 252, 
255–256, 280, 288, 298
Bengal, 3, 126–127, 131–132, 134, 156–157, 185, 194, 
297
Bengali style, 28, 30, 33Bhadracarī , 82–86, 88–89, 109–110
Bhadravarman I, King, 290Bhāgavatapurāṇa, 308Bhairava, 127, 131, 133–135, 137, 157–159Bhaiṣajyaguru, 98–99, 117, 127, 143, 147bharāla , 32
bhasmasnāna , 196, 239–240, 242–244, 256
Bhāvavarman II, King, 195Bhṛkuṭ
ī, 25, 27, 29–30, 37, 6
1, 65, 174
Bhṛṅgin, 292–2
95, 297, 301
Bhuvanako śa, 245
Biaro B
ahal, 131–132
bibliothèque, see library
bījākṣara, 21Bình Ðịnh, 141, 299, 335–336Bình Ðịnh Provincial Museum, 140–141Bình Thuận Provincial Museum, 353bKa’ ’gyur, 13bodhicittotpādana , 38
Bodhiruci, 14, 92bodhisattva, 2, 9–13, 15–17, 19–26, 28, 32, 34–39, 
42, 68, 72–76, 79–87, 89, 94–100, 102–104, 106–108, 110–111, 113–118, 127, 129, 133, 149–150, 167, 171, 174, 176–177, 180, 294
Boisselier, Jean, 335Book of the Sui (Sui shu ), 289
Borobudur, 2, 83, 130, 203, 238boundary marker, 21Brahmā, 133, 138, 140, 142, 240, 295, 312brāhmaṇa, 32–33, 251, 312Brahmic state, 64British Library, 239British Museum, 54, 87, 95–100, 102, 117–118bronze, 10–11, 14, 18, 20, 27, 29–30, 33–34, 53–54, 
56, 81, 118, 127–128, 139, 142–144, 150, 153–155, 157, 167, 169–172, 174–175, 178, 183–184, 186, 294
Buddha, 5, 23–24, 34, 40, 72, 75, 79, 81–83, 85, 89, 
91, 94, 98, 102, 104, 106–107, 110–111, 117–118, 
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   363 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 366] ---
Index364
126–127, 129, 131–134, 136–138, 142–143, 149–
150, 154–156, 158, 168–171, 173–174, 177–180, 184–188, 209, 215–216, 314
Buddha Amitābha, 14, 23, 179–181Buddha-spoken text, 12Buddhism, 1, 3–5, 10, 18–19, 31–32, 38–39, 68–69, 
71–72, 104, 108–109, 116, 126, 129, 132, 137–138, 142, 156–157, 168, 207, 312
Angkorian, 170Chinese, 70, 101Huayan, 84, 98Indian, 9–10, 19, 42, 82, 196Japanese, 82Malay, 34Newar, 32, 36, 42Sri Lankan, 76Tang, 18, 130tantric, 38, 42, 128–129, 156, 158, 168, 183Tibetan, 71–72, 109–111, 128, 130, 155
Buddhist art, 1, 3–4, 13, 18, 29, 71, 76, 79, 101, 108, 
112, 117, 149, 171, 174
buffoon (vidūṣaka), depiction of, 214–215Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient, 
139, 306, 308, 313
bumiputera , 32
Buṅgadyaḥ, 37Buruan, 34–35Bu ston, 31
C
Cakrasaṃvara, 126–127, 134, 135, 137–141, 184Cakravartin, 20, 130, 138, 148, 156Cālukya, 78, 285, 287Cam, 3, 5–6, 10, 128–129, 138–142, 147–148, 158, 
192, 194, 240, 246, 249, 289–295, 297–302, 305–307, 309–316, 319, 323, 327, 330, 334–337, 339–340, 342–346, 348, 350, 353, 355–357
Cambodia, 3, 5, 24, 81, 101, 127–128, 146, 149, 167, 
169–171, 183, 195–196, 199, 201, 202, 207, 214, 222, 225, 231, 232–234, 238–240, 248, 256, 290, 298, 305, 310–311, 319–321, 330, 334, 340, 342–343, 348, 355
cultural property of, 23temple dancers in, 215–216
Cam inscriptions, 334Campā, 2, 4–6, 20, 127–128, 138–142, 147–148, 
150, 154, 158, 193, 199, 241, 246, 289–291, 293, 297–299, 301–302, 305, 307–321, 323–328, 330, 335–337, 345, 355–356
Campapura, 289Campeśvara, 289Cam ruins: Standing toward the Ocean, 336Candi Bh
īma, 345
Can
di Jago, 23, 29–30, 33–34, 37
Candi Jawi, 156, 158Candi Panataran, 318–319, 322, 327, 329–330Candi Pawon, 238Candi Prambanan, see  Prambanan
Candi Sari, 203Candi Semar, 238Candi Singhosari, 177, 186Candi Śiva, 2, 203, 301canon, 13, 94, 168canonical, 12–13, 143carving, rock, 73–74, 86, 88–89, 94, 115caturbrahmavihāra , 59
caturdaśātmaka , 30
cave
Mogao, 1, 4, 66, 71–73, 75, 83, 85–87, 89–91, 
96–101, 103, 113, 117–118
Ellora, 78–81, 89, 94–96, 108, 173–174, 177, 180, 
249, 293, 295, 297
Hindu, 177Yulin, 1, 4, 66, 71, 73–75, 79–84, 86, 89, 91, 
93–96, 98–100, 104, 108, 113, 115, 117–118
Central India, 12Central Java, 2–3, 10, 130, 202, 301, 334, 345, 348, 
355
Chaiya, 54–55, 340Champa iseki: Umi ni mukatte tatsu, 336Champa Oukoku no iseki to bunka, catalogue, 
336
Chánh Lộ, 305, 315, 323, 326–327, 330chaplet, 131, 139Chiên Đàn, 6, 305, 323–324, 330, 336–337Chikreng, 21Chiming zang yuqie dajiao Zunna pusa daming 
chengjiu yigui jing , 20
China, 1–5, 17–19, 42, 66–70, 72, 74–78, 81–82, 
86, 88, 90, 93–94, 99–101, 102–105, 108–111, 116–117, 127–130, 133, 154–155, 289, 305, 309, 311, 313–314, 330
Middle Chinese, 18
Chinese Buddhism, 70, 101Cintāmaṇi-Avalokiteśvara, 20
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   364 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 367] ---
Index365
Cleveland Museum of Art, 184
Cochin, 26Cōḻa, 2–3, 24, 157, 209, 216, 243–244, 290, 293cold war, 129Colombo National Museum, 106Comilla, 131–132Comprehensive Mirror for Aiding Government, 
128
conch-holders, 153–154corpus, 9–10, 13–14, 16, 18, 21, 27, 29, 34–37, 39, 
53, 139, 167, 171, 178, 192, 216, 234, 242, 330
‘Corpus of Cam Inscriptions’ , 337cosmopolitan, 32–34, 68courtesan, 197, 209–211Cultural Revolution, 110, 112Cundā, 20, 174–175
D
Dacca, museum of, 132Đai Việt, 128, 138–139, 148, 154, 299, 313–314Daizong, emperor, 70–71, 110Dali kingdom, 19, 104ḍamaru , 157, 293, 294
Da Ming shilu  (Veritable Records of the Great 
Ming), 290
Damrei Krap temple , 335, 342–343
Đà Nẵng Museum, 6, 199, 295–299, 305–307, 
309–310, 316
Dangrek, 143Darśana , 26
‘decorative pattern analysis’ , 334deity, seafaring, 9, 42de Lajonquière, Lunet, 228–229, 232, 234Deśavarṇana , 32–33, 158
Description of the World, 215devarāja , 138
dhāraṇī, 32, 66, 82, 110–111Dharaṇ
īndravarman, K
ing, 136, 194, 202
Dhāraṇīsamuccaya , 17
Dharmadhātuvāg īśvaramaṇḍala, 63
Dh
armak īrti, 1, 3, 126, 1
56
Dhuli Jeng, 134Dhūpā, 62, 65d
īkṣā, 246, 252
Ding
lunwang da mantuluo guanding yigui , 18
Dīpā, 62, 65
Divākarap
aṇḍita, 133–134, 136–138, 147, 202Đông Dương, 307, 313–315, 330, 334–336, 342–343, 
345, 348
Draft of the Collected Statues of the Song (Song 
Huiyao Jigao ), 289–290
dream, 26, 240
dress, modes of, 10, 139, 148, 207Dunhuang, 13, 18, 19, 66, 68, 71–75, 77, 81,  
83, 86, 88, 90, 93, 95, 98–101, 108–110, 117,  130
Dương Long, 139–141, 335Durgā, 14, 111, 348
EEast Asia, 1, 4, 9, 17, 19, 42, 67–68, 94, 117eastern India, 12–13, 25, 27–28, 127, 180–181, 
183–184
East Java, 3–6, 29, 130, 154–158, 177, 186, 305, 319, 
330
EFEO (École française d’Extrême-Orient),  
138–139, 150–151, 237, 257, 282–289, 291, 327, 337
Eight Fears, 14–16Eight Great Fears, 9, 14–16, 28, 35, 39, 42eighth-day vow, 36Ekajaṭā, 20elephant, 16, 85, 98, 137–141, 148, 155, 249, 290, 
294–295, 305, 307, 315–316
‘elephant hand’ (gajahasta-mudrā), 290–291, 
294–295
Ellora Cave, 78–81, 89, 94–96, 108, 173–174, 177, 
180, 249, 293, 295, 297
Esoteric Buddhism, 1, 5, 66, 68, 72, 76–78, 83, 
126–128, 130, 138, 142, 167–168, 174, 183–185
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, 1
exoteric, 4, 42, 141, 153
F
face-tower (of Bayon temple), 127, 142–143, 147Fanxiang Juan, 17, 19Faxian, 101, 167, 173, 311–312fearlessness, 14, 20
see also  abhaya ; unfearing
Fear of Water, 15, 39, 41fenêtre gisante , see balustrade window
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   365 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 368] ---
Index366
fire shrine, 5, 222, 228, 232–234, 236–237, 246, 
283, 286, 288
‘flying palace’ motif, 344
Funan, 101, 196, 308
G
Gaganagañja, 65gajahasta-mudrā (‘elephant hand’), 290–291, 
294–295
Ga
ṇakārikā (GK), 192, 194, 1
96, 240, 244–245, 
247, 256
Gāndhar
vaśāstra, 196, 2
14
gaṇikās, 210, 216Gansu Provincial Museum, 118Garbhadhātu maṇḍala, 2, 84, 130
Garuḍa, 151, 285, 288, 299, 313, 342–343, 347Gautamaśr
ī(bhadra), 3–4, 9, 29–3
2
ghaṇṭā, 127, 142, 181gobu shinkan , scroll, 76
‘Golden Isle’ , 134Government Museum, Chennai, 92, 94, 103, 106Grahi, 34GRETIL (Göttingen Register of Electronic Texts 
in Indian Languages), 21, 257
Grwa thang monastery, 112, 116Guanyin, 18, 104Guhyasamājatantra , 36, 133, 138
Guimet Museum (Musée Guimet), 19, 91, 96, 
99–100, 117–118, 133, 185–188, 298, 314
Guitaḥ Bah
ī, 31–32
Gust
ala-vihāra, 30–31
Gyōrinshō , 18
Hhairstyle, 10, 96Haivajrika, 38hand gesture, 16, 76, 92, 207, 291, 293–295, 
297–298, 300, 302
Han dynasty, 68Hanumān, 213, 318–319Harṣavarman I, King, 283Harṣavarman III, King, 136–138, 286Hayagr
īva, 17–18, 25, 27, 29–30, 37
, 65
Hayam Wuruk, King, 130, 156, 158headdress, 79, 96, 178–181, 183, 186, 196, 295, 299Heian dynasty, 18Heling, 18Heruka, 4, 126–128, 131–132, 134–141, 147–148, 
150–151, 153, 155–159, 181
Hevajra, 21, 38, 42, 126–129, 133, 139, 141–145, 
148–151, 153–155, 157–158, 183–185
Hevajratantra , 38, 126, 128–129, 131, 134, 147, 
155–157, 183
see also  Tantra
Hexi Corridor, 4, 66, 68, 70–77, 79–80, 83–84, 
86, 89, 94, 99–101, 108–109, 112–117, 130
Heyejielipo Guanshiyin pusa shoufa tan, 18Himalayan Art Resources (HAR), 27–28, 37, 
40–41, 43
Hindu, 2, 13, 33–34, 175, 207, 308, 315
art, 1, 3–4cave, 177deities, 14festival, 208gods, 12, 180, 291temple, 78, 295, 305
Hinduisation, 24Hinduism, 39, 132, 196Hindustani, 33Hiraṇyaruci, 230–232History of Indian Buddhism , 180
Hòa Lai, 6, 334–337, 339–344, 346–3 48, 350–353, 
355–357
homa , 5, 222, 233–234, 238, 242, 245, 248, 250–
255, 257
Honolulu Museum of Art, 170Hōryūji Temple, 104, 107–108Hṛdaya , 12–13, 21, 26, 37, 38–39
Huayan Buddhism, 84, 98hu
ḍukkāra, 196, 24
1
Iiconography, 5–6, 9, 13–17, 19–20, 22–23, 28, 34, 
39, 73, 78, 80, 82, 88–89, 94–95, 98–99, 104, 127, 131, 136–140, 143, 167, 169, 171–1 75, 177–
181, 183–184, 188, 192–193, 203, 225, 290–291, 
293, 295, 297, 301, 312, 314, 330
archer with bow, 316–319
Ide’u Chos ’byung , 111
India, 2–4, 9–14, 17–20, 25–28, 33, 35–36, 42, 
66, 68–70, 72–75, 76, 78–82, 84–86, 88–89, 91–92, 94–95, 98–102, 104, 108–109, 111–113, 115–118, 126–127, 130–135, 137, 143, 156–158, 
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   366 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 369] ---
Index367
168, 171–173, 175, 177, 179–185, 187, 193–197, 
201–204, 206, 210–211, 214–216, 232, 234, 238–239, 241, 246–249, 251, 253, 256,  289–291, 293–298, 301, 305, 308–312, 315–316, 330, 348
central, 12eastern, 12–13, 25, 27–28, 127, 180–181, 183–184north, 1, 4, 29, 68, 73–74, 80–82, 100–101, 108, 
112, 117, 130, 156, 157, 172, 194–195, 239, 241, 247, 250
south, 1–5, 11–12, 18, 66, 68–70, 75–76, 80–82, 
84, 86, 89, 91–92, 94–95, 98–102, 104, 108, 113, 115–117, 130, 157, 171, 193, 202, 206, 216, 232, 238, 248–249, 256, 290, 294
western, 42
Indian art, 3, 10, 66, 108, 171, 310Indian artistic mode, 4, 66, 68, 72–76, 78, 80, 84, 
86, 91, 98, 108, 113, 116–117
Indian Buddhism, 9–10, 19, 42, 70, 82, 101, 126, 
135, 137, 168, 174, 180, 196
Indianization, 10, 66, 68, 72–74, 91, 98Indian manuscript, 12, 29Indian National Museum, 28, 118, 293Indian theatre, 215Indo-Malaya, 33Indonesia, 4, 30, 33, 56, 104, 134, 157–158, 177, 238, 
345
Indrābhiṣeka , 148
Indrakumāra, prince, 147–148Indrapura, 5, 289, 291, 301–302Indravarman I, King, 195, 235, 241, 282Indravarman II, King, 335inscription, 3, 6, 21, 23, 29–34, 73, 75, 81, 83, 85–
86, 89, 98–99, 102, 115, 117–118, 128, 130–133, 136, 138, 140, 142, 147–149, 158, 168–169, 171, 173, 175, 178, 185–186, 192, 194–195, 197, 199–202, 204, 206–209, 211, 214–216, 222, 228–241, 244, 247, 250, 253, 255–256, 282–290, 293, 305, 309–312, 316, 327, 330, 334–335, 
337, 339, 343, 350, 352–353, 355, 357
Inventaire descriptif des monuments čams de 
l’Annam , 334
inverted fleuron, 309, 319, 321, 323‘iron stūpa’ , 69Īśāna, 65Īśānavarman I, King, 195, 239, 282Islam, 2–3, 126–127, 157, 159, 204JJambi, 157Japan, 1–2, 18, 19, 76, 104–105, 107–108, 127, 151, 
154, 156, 159, 336
Japanese Buddhism, 82, 254Japanese sect, 130JASA (Japan-Apsara Safeguarding Angkor), 151Java, 1–6, 9–10, 14, 17–18, 20–21, 27, 29–30, 32–34, 
39, 42, 53–54, 56, 80, 83, 127–130, 154–159, 167, 177, 186, 192–193, 202–204, 215, 238–239, 245, 297, 301, 305, 310–312, 316–317, 319, 322–323, 325, 327, 329–330, 345, 348, 355
Central, 2–3, 10, 130, 202, 301, 334, 345, 348, 355East, 3–6, 29, 130, 154–158, 177, 186, 305, 319, 
330
Jayabuddhamahānātha, 23–24, 34, 188Jaya Harivarman, King, 140, 300Jaya Indravarman, King, 141, 312Jayakatwang, 156Jayasiṃhapur
ī, 23
Jayavajrapur ī, 23
Jayavarman I, K
ing, 132
Jayavarman II, King, 137, 282, 335, 343
Jayavarman III, King, 195, 282
Jayavarman IV , King, 283Jayavarman V , King, 132–133, 285Jayavarman VI, King, 133, 136–139, 202, 286Jayavarman VII, King, 5, 23–24, 128, 137, 140–143, 
147–148, 150, 153, 156, 167–1 71, 173, 175, 177, 
179–180, 183–188, 192–193, 196, 202, 206–207, 209, 214–216, 228–229, 235, 287, 298
Jayavarman VIII, King, 24Jayavarma-Parameśvara, King, 149–150Jina, 126, 133, 138, 154, 168, 172, 175, 179jinābhiṣekaḥ, 148Jin’gangding , 69–70
Jin’ge monastery, 111Joko Dolog, 34, 154Journal de Fouilles , 151
KKaḍiri dynasty, 157Kailāsa, Mount, 128, 134, 147, 197, 314–315, 319, 321Kailāsanātha monument, 78Kaiser Library, 32kakavin Sutasoma , 156
Kālacakra, 31, 184
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   367 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 370] ---
Index368
Kālamukhas, 192, 197, 215
Kaliṅga, 18, 130, 134Kalparāja , see Amoghapāśakalparāja
Kanchanaburi, 23Kāpālika, 131, 192, 194, 203, 215, 232, 293Kapilapura, 149Kāraṇḍavyūha, 12, 20–23, 42Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra, 143, 170Karimun Besar, 3, 30Kav
īndrārimat
hana, 132
Kashmir, 26, 83, 180, 197Kathmandu Valley, 9, 25, 27–28, 35, 37, 42, 194Kauṭhāra, 289, 291, 343
Kbal Sre Y eay Yin, 133Kedah, 3, 24, 157Ken Dedes, queen, 186Khagarbha, 62, 65khaṭvāṅga, 131, 137, 139, 157, 301khikkhirika , 19
Khmer, 2–6, 9, 20–24, 34, 38, 42, 126, 127–129, 
132–134, 136–1 43, 147–148, 150–151, 158, 167, 
171, 177–178, 180, 185, 187, 192–1 96, 199, 
201–202, 204, 206–2 11, 214, 216, 222–223, 225, 
228, 232–235, 238–2 42, 244, 246, 249–251, 
253, 255–257, 262, 282, 289–291, 293, 297–301, 305, 311–313, 315–316, 319, 323, 330, 335, 340, 342–345
Pāśupatas, in domains, 192–195, 199, 222
Khorat, 127, 143K
īrtip
aṇḍita, 132
Koh Ker, 132, 225, 227, 283Ko-ki, 26Korat, 136Korea, 1, 127, 130–131Kriyāsamuccaya , 32, 38
Krodha , 133, 174
Kṛtanagara, King, 29, 32–34, 128–129, 154–158kṣatriya, 32–33, 130Kṣitigarbha, 65, 73Kubera, 18, 63, 65, 72, 93–94, 95, 117, 172Kublai Khan, emperor, 128, 154, 155–156, 158Kuñjarakarṇa, 21Kutri, 34–35
L
Laghusaṃvara, 137Lakṣm
ī, 307, 312, 315L
akṣm īnārāyaṇa, 39
Lak
ulīśa, 194, 225, 232, 2
40, 246–249, 251
Lalitpur, 9, 26, 31, 41‘land of gold’ , 134landscape, 5, 127, 193–194, 197, 203, 216, 241,  
247
L ’ art du Champa et son évolution , 334
La statuaire du Champa, 335‘Leper King Terrace’ , 209library, and temple, 222, 225, 229–234, 238–239, 
243–2 44, 255, 282
see also  pustakāśrama
liṅga-yoni, 306–307, 309–310, 330Lingodbhavamūrti , 201–202, 319
Los Angeles Museum County of Art (LACMA), 
32, 172
lotus, 13, 16–17, 20, 22, 25–26, 36–37, 53–56, 
64–65, 75, 132–133, 139, 141, 143, 151, 169–171, 174, 176–178, 181–182, 186, 249, 292, 298, 300, 307, 309, 315
lunar month, 38Luoyang Guangfu Temple, 70Lynyi, 101
M
Magadha, 17, 26, 129, 174, 177, 180, 187Mahābhārata , 308
Mahākāla, 18, 128, 155, 157–159, 197mahāpa
ṇḍita, 3
0, 180
mahārājādhirāja , 32–34, 158
Mahāvairocana, 20, 170Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi , 130
Mahāvairocanasūtra , 170
Mahāvajranātha, 20Mahāyāna, 1, 23–24, 30, 42, 76, 143, 167–168, 170, 
173, 180, 183–184, 207
mahāyogatantra , 20, 109
Maheśvara, 14, 22, 133–134, 137, 196, 211, 215Maheśvaranirvyūha , 22
Mah
īdharapura d
ynasty, 133–134, 136, 141
Mahmūd of Ghazn ī, 156
Mah
otsavavidhi , 209–211
maison du feu, 228Maitreya, 62, 65, 73, 83, 103, 176Majapahit dynasty, 156, 158makara , 2, 155, 298
makarārūḍhaḥ , 63
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   368 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 371] ---
Index369
Malay Archipelago, 4, 9–10, 24, 27, 29–30, 38–39, 
42, 58
Malay Buddhism, 34
Malayo-Javanese world, 9–10, 14, 27, 29, 34, 39, 
42
Malay Peninsula, 1–3, 6, 10, 18–19, 54, 80, 101, 
134, 157, 348
Malays, 24, 32–33, 42, 311, 319
see also  Malāyu ; Melayu
Malay social order, 33Malāyu , 32–33, 157–158
see also  Malays; Melayu
Malyang, 147maṇḍala, 1, 17–18, 36–37, 39, 66, 70, 72, 81–82,  
84, 89–92, 110–111, 117–118, 126–130, 132–137, 139, 141, 143–144, 147, 154–157, 159, 254,  348
maṇḍalarājāgrī, 36–37, 64Maṇḍalas in the Making, 74‘maṇḍalic schema’ , 21manifestation, 2, 4–5, 10, 12–13, 75, 83, 126, 133, 
235, 236, 248–249, 291, 294, 302
Mañjughoṣa, 62, 65Mañjuśr
ī, 71–73, 83–85, 98–99, 11
7
Mañjuśrībuddhakṣetraguṇālaṃkāravyūha, 38Mañjuvajra, 14Mañjuvajramukhākhyāna , 39
mantra, 1 15, 17–18, 21, 30, 32, 39, 66, 82, 126, 
129–130, 154, 193, 196, 234, 236, 242, 245–248, 251
mantradevatā s, 20
Mantramārga, 192–193, 195–197, 201, 216, 239–
240, 245, 252, 256
Mantranaya, 1, 3, 130Mantrayāna, 130manuscript (MS), 2, 4–5, 12–17, 21, 23–24, 26–29, 
32, 35–39, 66, 72–73, 88, 157, 167–168, 173, 181–185, 222, 231–234, 238–239, 243–244, 249–250, 256
Māra, 131, 137–139, 314Marco Polo, 215Maritime Asia, 1, 3–4, 13, 126, 128, 131, 156, 
158–159, 256
Maritime Southeast Asia, 9–11, 14, 16, 24, 26, 
67–69, 81, 101
Mattavil
āsa, 19
4, 244
Maulivarmadeva, King, 32–34, 157Māyājālamahātantra , 20meditation, 23, 30, 36, 109, 129, 158, 170, 172, 175, 
177–181, 184, 186–188, 199, 223, 245–246, 248, 251–252
Melaka, 155, 158Melayu, 4, 9–10, 32–35, 42, 158
see also  Malays; Malāyu
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New Y ork, 102–
103, 139, 149, 151, 318
Middle Chinese, 18Mirror Illuminating the Royal Genealogies , The, 
110
Mitrayogin, 26Mogao cave, 1, 4, 66, 71–73, 75, 83, 85–87, 89–91, 
96–101, 103, 113, 117–118
monastery, 1, 9, 12, 25, 28, 31–32, 70–71, 110–112, 
116, 126, 129–131, 133–134, 136, 156, 182, 185, 193, 204, 215, 231, 239, 250, 335, 342
monk, 1, 9, 11–12, 18, 25–26, 28, 32, 68–69, 71, 
75–76, 81, 86, 100–101, 103–104, 108–110, 112, 127, 130–132, 156, 171, 180–182, 196, 203–204, 215, 239, 312
‘motif analysis’ , 334Mount Kailāsa, 128, 134, 147, 197, 314–315, 319, 321Mount Wutai, 71, 111, 127, 147Mpu Prapañca, 32–33Mpu Tantular, 156mukhākhyāna , 39
mukuṭa , 133, 157
Musée Guimet, see  Guimet Museum
Museon, 56museum of Dacca, 132Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 94Museum of Quảng Trị, 327Mỹ Khánh tower, 350, 356Mỹ Sơn, 139–141, 148, 153, 159, 194, 199, 246–247, 
289–293, 297–298, 301, 307, 309–310, 312, 314–315, 319, 321, 323, 326, 330, 334–336, 342, 345–346, 348, 350, 356
Nnāga , 15, 65, 133, 136, 138, 176, 188, 211, 314–315
Nāgabuddhi, 36, 60, 69nāgapāśaśaṅkhabhṛd, 63Nāgārjuna, 69, 176–177Nagpur Central Museum, 172, 175Nairṛti, 65Nālandā, 14, 19, 69, 131, 157, 174–177, 180, 185
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   369 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 372] ---
Index370
Nanzhao kingdom, 19–20, 104
Nara dynasty, 18Nara National Museum, 104–105Narasiṃhavarman II, King, 69–70Na
ṭarāja, 5, 194, 2
44, 290
National Museum, Jakarta, 29, 53, 55, 177National Museum, Kuala Lumpur, 55National Museum of Cambodia in Phnom Penh 
(NMCPP), 22–23, 133, 142–143, 154, 169, 179, 201–202, 208, 255
National Museum of Vietnamese History, 298National Protection Buddhism, 111, 117N
āṭyaśāstra
, 2, 196, 210, 295
navagraha , 252–254, 263–264, 282–2 85, 287–288
neak ta , 142
Nelson-Atkins Museum of Arts, 83–86Nepal, 1, 3–4, 9–10, 17, 20, 23, 25, 27–28, 31–32, 
35–42, 74, 76, 159, 173, 194
Newar Buddhism, 32, 36, 42Ninh Thuận province, 56, 290, 300, 336–337, 340Ninh Thuận Provincial Museum, 343Niṣpannayogāvalī, 62–63Ni
śvāsaguh
ya, 245
Niśvāsamukha , 197, 201
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, 197, 201, 240noose, 11–15, 19–20, 22, 25, 28, 37, 39, 53–56, 
64–65, 91, 133
Norodom Sihanouk Museum, 151Northern Camp
ā, 291, 293, 3
01
Northern Thailand, 54, 143north India, 1, 3–4, 29, 68, 73–74, 80–82, 100–101, 
108, 112, 117, 130, 156–157, 172, 194–195, 239, 241, 247, 250
N
ṛttam ūrti, 290
N
usantara, 13
Nyigmapa, 109
O
Odisha, 4, 10, 80, 82–84, 86, 89, 131, 180–182, 185Odisha State Museum, 182offerings, 37, 85, 89–91, 117–118, 129, 155, 181–182, 
196, 199, 202, 207, 209, 211, 214–216, 236, 242, 246, 248–249, 293, 299–300, 307–309, 314–315, 330
Old Cam language, 148, 290, 337Old Dynastic History of the Tang, 111Old Khmer language, 147, 192, 208–209, 211Old Malay, 32ornament, 10, 16, 25, 36–37, 64–65, 85, 139, 176, 
209, 295, 310, 336, 342
PPadang Lawas, 157–158Padang Roco, 29–30, 32–34, 55Padmākaramati, 36, 60, 62Padmanarteśvara, 14Pagoda, 36, 64Pakistan, 14–15, 176Pāla, 28, 30, 73–75, 101, 112, 117, 126, 129, 131, 134, 
156, 168, 174–175, 177, 297
Pāla dynasty, 126, 129, 131, 156Palembang, 3, 10, 157Pallava, 1, 4, 11, 68–70, 76–79, 81, 92, 94, 96, 
100–101, 103–104, 106, 117, 290, 294
Pallava dynasty, 1Paṇai, 157Pañcārthabhāṣya , 194, 196, 240, 257
Pāñcārthika Pāśupata, 193pa
ṇḍita, 3–4, 9, 2
4, 196, 211, 215
Pāṇḍuraṅga, 140, 148, 289–291, 297, 299–302, 337, 
343
Panpan, 101pantheon, 9, 13, 19, 23, 30, 37, 138, 148, 150, 346‘Paradise of Bhaiṣajyaguru’ , painting, 98–99Pararaton , 215
Parmentier, Henri, 291–293, 309, 314, 334, 336, 
338–346, 348–350, 352
P
ārvatī, 2
91–293, 301, 315, 327
Pāśupata, 192–197, 199–203, 207–208, 214–216, 
222, 232, 239–252, 254–256, 290, 293
in Khmer domains, 192–195, 199, 222
Pāśupata Śaivism, 192, 194, 197, 239, 246, 251, 254P
āśupatas ūtra, 192, 1
94, 196, 199, 216, 240, 249
Patna Museum, 171peacock, 37, 65Peninsular Malaysia, see  Malay Peninsula
Phan Rang, 10, 140, 337Phetchaburi, 23Phimai, 133–134, 136–141, 143, 159, 228, 273, 286, 
299
Phnom Banteay Nan, 173Phnom Bayan, 241, 283Phnom Bok, 266, 283Phnom Chisor, 286, 299
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   370 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 373] ---
Index371
Phnom Krom, 265 , 283
Phnom Kulen, 335, 342–343
Phnom Penh, 133, 142–143, 154, 169, 179, 201, 208, 
229
Phnom Preah Vihear, 240–241Phnom Rung, 204, 273, 286, 299Phnom Sandak, 136, 196, 202, 214Phú Hài group, 336 –340, 348, 350, 353, 356–3 57
‘pizza effect’ , 4
Po Dam group, 6, 336–337, 339–3 40, 348–3 57
Po Kloong Garai temple, 334–336Po Nagar, 291, 310, 334, 336, 343Po Rome temple, 334–335Poruṣāda, 156poṣadha , 26, 32, 36–39
Poṣadhavidhāna , 32, 38
Potalaka mountain, 36, 64pothi , 173, 183
Prajñāpāramitā, 5, 26, 28, 70, 91, 132–133, 157, 
167–170, 172–188
Prakāśadharma, King, 289, 309–310, 312Prambanan, 2, 13, 54, 203, 301, 310, 316–317, 323, 
325
Prasat Chrung, 207Prasat Damrei Krap, 343Prasat Hin Phimai, 138Prasat Khna, 230 –231, 233–235, 237–238, 253, 264, 
282
Prasat Kôk Čak, 229, 233, 239
Prasat Komnap, 241Prasat Muang Singh, 23Prasat Ong Mong, 241Prasat Pram, 227, 267, 283Prasat Prei, 195, 241Prasat Strangé, 235 –237, 283
Prasat Ta Keo, 209Prasat Tram Neak, 224Prasat Trapeang Ropou, 236, 283, 286pratyekabuddha, 23Preah Khan, 23, 142, 146, 168–169, 173, 188, 202, 
206–207, 209, 228–229, 277, 281, 287
Preah Ko, 201, 222–224, 235, 253, 263, 282Preah Palilay, 150Preah Pithu, 150Preah Rup, 256, 268, 284Preah Stung, 142Preah Vihear, 54, 136, 196, 202, 214, 225, 227, 230, 
240–241, 282–2 83, 286, 319pre-Angkorian art, 345pribumi , 32
Proto-Bengali-cum-Proto-Maithili script, 33Pūco Bah
ī, 32
Puṇyodaya, 81–8
2, 132
Pura Puseh, 34–35Pure Land, 73–75, 83, 86, 107, 117Puṣpā, 62–63, 65, 195pustakāśrama , 230–231, 239, 250, 282
see also  library
QQing dynasty, 73Quảng Ngãi, 323Qubilai Khan, see  Kublai Khan
RRaden Wijaya, 156rājaguru , 133, 136, 202
rāja-hotā, 134Rājarāja, King, 157, 209Rājendra Cōḻa, King, 157Rājendravarman II, King, 132, 201, 256, 284Rajshahi, 28, 185Rāma, 213, 305, 308, 312, 314, 316–317, 319, 327Rāmakerti , 214
Rāmāyaṇa, 2, 5–6, 213–214, 305, 308–310, 312, 
315–316, 319, 330
ramparts, 142, 150Ratchaburi, 23Ratnagiri, 82, 131, 157Ratnaṭīkā , 192, 194, 196, 240
Ratubaka, 130Rauravāgama , 210, 243, 249
Rāvaṇa, 310, 312, 314–315, 318–319, 321, 345Raviśr
ījñāna, 31
reb
ellion, An Lushan, 70, 130
Record of Buddhist Kingdoms, A, 311
Record of Famous Painters of Successive 
Dynasties , 70
Riau, 3, 30Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde, 30, 33, 53rock carving, 73–74, 86, 88–89, 94, 115Ronggowarsito Museum, 14rosary, 13–14, 15, 20, 23, 25, 37, 53–56, 64–65, 139, 
170, 174, 199, 241, 297, 298, 301
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   371 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 374] ---
Index372
Royal Asiatic Society, 32, 181
Rubin Museum, 155rudragaṇikās, 209–211Ruins and Culture of the Kingdom of Campā, 
catalogue, 335–336
SSāb Bak, 133ṣaḍakṣarīmahāvidyā, 21ṣaḍaṅgayoga, 31Sadāśiva, 22, 195, 201Saddharmapuṇḍarīka , 15, 23, 39, 208
ṣaḍgati, 23sādhana , 25–26, 30, 35–36, 39, 42, 62, 177, 179– 
181
Sādhanamālā , 13–14, 60, 62, 137, 180
Śaiva, 2, 5, 14, 126–129, 131–134, 136–138, 147, 
149–150, 159, 187, 192–197, 199, 200–202, 204–210, 215–216, 222, 232, 234, 239–241, 243–247, 249–252, 255–257, 289, 293, 300–301, 343, 346
‘Śaiva Age, The’ , 129
Śaivism, 3, 5, 1
4, 78, 126–127, 129, 131, 134, 150, 
156, 192, 196–197, 207, 215–216, 222, 225, 239, 245–246, 251, 254, 256, 289–290, 293, 301
Śākta, 129, 132Śākyamitra, 132Śākyamuni, 105, 110, 129, 173Śākyarakṣita, 14Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism, 128Śākyaśr
ī, 19, 24–26, 30, 35
Śāk
yaśrībhadra, 24–25, 30, 4
2
Samantabhadra, 65, 73, 82–86, 96, 98, 118samaya , 153, 182
Sambor Prei Kuk, 6, 195, 200–201, 225–226, 255, 
282, 290, 344
sampot , 140–141, 299, 345–346
saṃsāra, 126, 131, 137Saṃskārakārikā , 240, 247, 251–252, 256–257
Saṃvarodayatantra , 128, 134, 147, 156
Samye monastery, 71, 110–113Sanbao ganying yaolüe lu , 11
Sandak, 136, 196, 202, 214saṅgha, 129–130, 170, 173Sang Hyang Kamahāyānan Mantranaya , 130
Sang Nila Utama, 34Sang Sapurba, 33–34Sanskrit, 2–3, 5, 10, 12–13, 16–17, 21–22, 25, 31–36, 
38–39, 42, 59, 69, 82, 109, 126, 131–132, 136, 149–150, 154–155, 158, 167–168, 179–181, 183, 192–194, 197, 199, 208, 210–211, 214, 216, 222, 228, 230, 232, 234–235, 239, 240–242, 245, 247–248, 256, 290, 295, 312, 316, 337, 343, 352
Saptam
ātṛkās (Seven M
others), 177, 180
Saraswati Mahal Library, 238Saruaso, 158Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara, 126, 131Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra  (SDP), 111
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgrahatantra  (STTS), 
69–71, 78, 82, 91, 109, 111
sattvaparyaṅka, 65Satyavarman, King, 343, 348scroll, 2, 76, 239Scroll of Indic Icons, 19sculpture, 2, 5, 9–11, 14–16, 18–19, 24, 27, 29–30, 
33–34, 68, 70, 73–74, 76, 78, 80–81, 92, 94, 96, 101–104, 110, 112–116, 139–140, 168–169, 171, 174–177, 181, 183, 185–186, 289–302, 305–307, 309–310, 313, 316, 327, 335, 343, 346
seafaring deity, 9, 42Sejarah Melayu, 33Sena, 26, 28, 30, 131, 134, 210–211Shingon sect, 127, 130Siem Reap, 2, 139, 150–151, 169, 224, 229, 236, 
282–288, 335, 343
Silk Road, 1, 68‘Silk Routes’ , 1, 130śilpaśāstra , 2, 143, 295, 315
sīmā , 21–22
Singapore, 9, 43, 149, 151, 153Siṅhasāri, 9–10, 29–30, 32–35, 154, 157, 159, 177, 
186
Siṅhasāri dynasty, 9–10, 157, 186Śiva, 2, 5, 78, 91–92, 131–134, 136, 137–139, 149, 
193–197, 201–204, 206–207, 211, 213, 230, 234–237, 239–240, 243–252, 290–302, 306, 310, 314–315, 323, 327, 330, 345
Śiva-Buddha, 155–156Śiva Dakṣiṇāmūrti, 246, 248–252Śivadharma , 201, 239, 243, 256–257
Śivadharmottara , 210, 216, 222, 232–233, 238, 240, 
243–246, 249–250, 256–257
śivahasta , 248, 251–252
Śivaliṅga, 149–150, 187, 201–202, 290, 300
Śivānanda, s
ee Jaya Harivarman
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   372 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 375] ---
Index373
Śivapūjā, 149–150
Śiva (Rudra), 193, 240, 245Skanda, 54, 291–293, 295, 301skullcup, 25śloka , 312, 343, 352
Somaśambhupaddhati , 248
Song dynasty, 101, 108, 290, 299Song Huiyao Jigao (Draft of the Collected Statues 
of the Song), 289–290
Southeast Asia, maritime, 10–11, 14, 16, 26Southern Thailand, 177 –178, 348
south India, 1–5, 11–12, 18, 66, 68–70, 75–76, 
80–82, 84, 86, 89, 91–92, 94–95, 98–102, 104, 108, 113, 115–117, 130, 157, 171, 193, 202, 206, 216, 232, 238, 248–249, 256, 290, 294
ŚrīCakrasaṃvaranāmamahāyoginītantrarāja , 137
Śr
ī Jayasiṃhavarm
an, King, 311
Sri Lanka, 1, 3, 13, 69–70, 76, 78, 96, 98, 101, 104, 
106, 130, 157, 177–178
Sri Lankan Buddhism, 76Śrīmañjuvajrodayamaṇḍalavidhi , 20
Śr
īmitra, 12, 14
Ś
rīsaṃpuṭatant
roktavajrasattvamaṇḍala, 20, 62
Śrīvijaya, 3, 9–11, 13–1
7, 19–22, 24–26, 28–29, 
32–34, 37, 42, 53, 129–130, 156–157
Śrī Vikrān
tavarman, King, see  Vikrāntavarman
stele, 21, 75, 84, 86, 89, 138, 149, 168–173, 177, 
181–182, 185, 194, 209, 237, 241, 289–290, 312, 342–344, 347–348, 353
Stern, Philippe, 291, 334–336, 339–340, 342–346, 
348, 352, 355–356
STTS  (Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgrahatantra ), 
69–71, 78, 82, 91, 109, 111
Śubhapur, 131, 157Sudhana, 25, 27, 29–30, 37, 65, 73, 83–85, 110Sui dynasty, 102, 289Sui shu (Book of the Sui), 289Sulawesi, 10–11, 54Sumatra, 2–4, 9–11, 18, 29, 33–34, 53–55, 69, 
126–128, 131–132, 134, 156–159, 312
Sumeru, 36, 64, 134, 137Sungai Langsat, 158Sung dynasty, 140Surat Thani, 54, 340Surocolo, 157Sūryavarman, King, 128, 133–134, 136–140, 148, 
196, 201–202, 228, 234, 241, 286, 299–300
Suvarṇabhūmi, 12, 134Suvarṇadv
īpa, 1, 3, 128, 134, 1
56–157
Suzong, emperor, 70, 130Swāt, 14–16, 19
T
Ta Bāhāḥ, 41Taishō Canon, 94Takeo, 132Tang Buddhism, 18, 130Tang dynasty, 11, 68–69, 74–76, 83–84, 101–103, 
105, 108, 313
Tantra, 38, 109, 111, 126–128, 130, 132, 134, 137–139, 
142–143, 148, 154–157, 168, 173, 184, 234
see also  Hevajratantra
tantric Buddhism, 38, 42, 128–129, 156, 158, 168, 
183
Ta Prohm, 168–169, 173, 202, 206, 214Tārā, 17, 25, 27, 29–30, 37, 42, 61, 96, 98, 167, 171, 
174, 180–181, 185
Tāranātha, 26Tarumūla-mahāvihāra, 28tathāgata , 20, 22, 29–30, 81–82, 133, 179, 180–182, 
184–185
temple, and library, 222, 225, 229–234, 238–239, 
243–2 44, 255, 282
see also  pustakāśrama
Temur Khan, emperor, 196Tendai sect, 130Tengger community, 34Testament of Ba, 72, 108, 110Thailand, 10, 24, 54, 101, 104, 127–128, 143, 
177–178, 228, 239, 286, 340, 348
Northern, 54, 143
Southern, 177–178, 348
Thaṃ Bah
ī, 19, 25–28, 32, 37–38
Th
amel, 4, 9, 24–25, 27, 37, 42
Tháp Mẫm, 140, 297–301three-branched staff, see  tridaṇḍa
Tibet, 1–4, 12–13, 16, 25–26, 28, 31–32, 35, 42, 
66, 68–76, 82–83, 85–86, 88–89, 91, 93–94, 98–100, 108–118, 126–128, 130, 134, 137, 139, 148, 153–1 57, 159, 177, 180, 183–184, 250
Tibetan Buddhism, 71–72, 109–111, 128, 130, 155tiger pelt, 13, 20, 25–26, 29ṭīkā, 20, 132, 158
tin, 18Toyota Foundation, 335–336
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   373 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 376] ---
Index374
Trailokyavaśaṃkara, 37
Trailokyavijaya, 82, 110, 133Trà Kiệu Pedestal, 5–6, 305–310, 312–317, 319–320, 
323–327, 330
transmigration, 4, 9, 35, 42transmission, modes of, 1, 13, 15, 19, 21, 24, 32, 42, 
68, 75, 81, 89, 100–104, 109–110, 116, 127, 155, 183, 199, 246–247, 249, 290–291, 295, 297, 301
Tribhuvanādityavarman, King, 138, 140–142, 287tridaṇḍa (three-branched staff), 14, 19, 25, 29–30
Trimūrti, 133Trisong Detsen, emperor, 71, 111Tuoluoni ji jing , 14, 17–18
tympanum, 139–140, 292–295, 297–299, 302, 343, 
345
UUdayādityavarman, King, 136–137
Udyotanibandha , 31
Umā, 22–23Uttarakāmikāgama , 211
VVairocana, 20, 68, 70, 72–73, 73, 76–77, 81–87, 
89–91, 110–111, 113–118, 133, 182
Vaiṣṇava, 14, 39, 133, 136, 138, 194, 241, 250vajra , 18, 22, 36, 64–65, 68, 110, 126–127, 129–131, 
133, 139, 142, 154, 181
Vajrabodhi/Vajrabuddhi, 1, 3–4, 68–71, 76–78, 
100–101, 108–109, 117
Vajradhara, 63, 127, 133–134, 137, 142Vajradharma, 37, 65Vajradhātu maṇḍala, 2, 37, 70–71, 109, 111, 
113–114, 127, 130
Vajrahūm ̐kāra, 39
Vajranakhā, 20Vajrāṅkuśa, 63, 65Vajrapāṇi, 20, 65, 73, 132–133, 137Vajrapāśa, 65Vajrasattva, 72, 89–91, 117, 126, 133–134, 136, 
142–143, 148, 153, 156–157
Vajraśekharasūtra , 69
Vajrasphoṭa, 65Vajrāveśa, 65Vajrayāna, 3, 126, 142, 154, 183–184, 207Vālm
īki, 312vara
da, 22, 25, 53–56
Varendra Research Museum, 26, 28, 184–185Varuṇa, 65, 95, 244vassal, 33, 138, 148vastuśāstra , 2, 143
Vāyu, 65, 251, 257Veritable Records of the Great Ming (Da Ming 
shilu ), 290
‘vermicular pattern’ , 335Vibhūticandra, 24–26, 30–32, 35, 42Victoria and Albert Museum, 11, 148, 178vidūṣaka (buffoon), depiction of, 214–215vidyālaya , 232, 238, 243
Vidyānandana, prince, 128, 147–148, 153, 158Vidyāp
īṭha, 127–128, 131, 1
34
Vidyārāja, 138Vietnam, 5, 26, 101–103, 128, 140–141, 156, 246, 
289, 298, 305–306, 310, 323, 327, 335, 337, 339, 342, 345
Vietnam War, 342vihāra , 25, 182, 314
Vijaya, 5, 128, 139–140, 147–148, 153, 289, 291, 297, 
298–302
Vijayarakṣita, 31Vikrama Cōḻa, King, 244Vikramaś
īla, 9, 25, 157, 18
2
Vikrāntavarman, King, 194, 309, 342, 348Vimalak
īrti, 72
V
iṃśatividhi, 60
Viṣkambhin, 65Viṣṇu, 29, 34, 133, 187, 204, 236, 305, 312, 330
see also  aṣṭabāhu
Viṣṇuvardhana, King, 29–30, 33–35
vra
ḥ vleṅ, 234–235
Vṛtta
mālāstuti, 14
W
Walters Art Museum, 21Wang, Michelle, 74Wat Eng Khna, 201, 315, 319–320waterlily, 37, 65, 173waterpot, 13, 15, 19, 22, 25, 37, 53–56, 64–65Wat Keo, 340Wat Nokor, 279, 288Wat Phu, 136, 194, 202, 231Way of Mantras, 130western India, 42
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   374 8/3/22   4:29 PM

--- [Page 377] ---
Index375
wheel, eight-spoked, 65, 182
window ventilation system, see  balustrade 
window
Wutai, Mount, 71, 111, 127, 147
X
xenarch, 33Xi Xia Empire, 112Xuanzang, 17, 69–70Xuanzong, emperor, 70
Y
yab-yum, 139, 155Y ale University Art Gallery, 39–41Y ama, 65, 95, 245, 288Y aśodharapura, 132Y aśovarman I, King, 195–96, 200–201, 204, 241, 
283
Y e shes dbyangs, 86, 109Yijing, 17, 132yogapa
ṭṭa, 223–226, 2
46Yogasiddhāntabuddhasiddhitantra , 39
Y ogatantra, 2, 20, 68, 71, 109, 130, 132, 157, 
183–184
Y oga tradition, 68–72, 78, 89, 91, 108–109, 111, 
114, 116–117
Y ogin ī, 128, 138, 143, 1
45, 153, 157
Y ogin ītantra, 126–127, 12
9, 131, 134, 143, 183–184, 
207
yoni, 150, 199, 306–307, 309–310, 330
Yuan dynasty, 196Yuan shi , 154
Yulin cave, 1, 4, 66, 71, 73–75, 79–84, 86, 89, 91, 
93–96, 98–100, 104, 108, 113, 115, 117–118
Yunnan, 19, 104
Z
Zeitgeist (of the late 13th century), 34Zhang Y anyuan, 70Zhao Rugua, 215–216Zhou Daguan, 196, 209, 256Zhufanzhi, 215
12_Index V1 _3P_8Mar22.indd   375 8/3/22   4:29 PM