--- [Page 1] ---
30 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, 
Singapore 119614
http://bookshop.iseas.edu.sg
PIC238SPIRITS AND SHIPSSPIRITS AND SHIPSAcri, Blench, Landmann
Cultural Transfers in 
Early Monsoon AsiaCultural Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia
Edited by Andrea Acri, Roger 
Blench, Alexandra LandmannSPIRITS 
AND SHIPS
7 8 9 8 1 4 7 6 2 7 5 59ISBN  978-981-4762-75-5NSC25
ASIA
Ancient HistoryThis volume seeks to foreground a “borderless” history and geography 
of South, Southeast, and East Asian littoral zones that would be maritime-f ocused,  
and thereby explore the ancient connections and dynamics of interactio n that 
favoured the encounters among the cultures found throughout the region str etching 
from the Indian Ocean littorals to the Western Paciﬁc, from the early histo rical 
period to the present. Transcending the artiﬁcial boundaries of macro- regions 
and nation-states, and trying to bridge the arbitrary divide between (i nherently 
cosmopolitan) “high” cultures (e.g. Sanskritic, Sinitic, or Islamic ate) and “local” 
or “indigenous” cultures, this multidisciplinary volume explores t he metaphor 
of Monsoon Asia as a vast geo-environmental area inhabited by speakers of 
numerous language phyla, which for millennia has formed an integrated sy stem 
of littorals where crops, goods, ideas, cosmologies, and ritual practic es circulated 
on the sea-routes governed by the seasonal monsoon winds. The collective bod y 
of work presented in the volume describes Monsoon Asia as an ideal theatre fo r 
circulatory dynamics of cultural transfer, interaction, acceptan ce, selection, and 
avoidance, and argues that, despite the rich ethnic, linguistic and socio cultural 
diversity, a shared pattern of values, norms, and cultural models is discer nible 
throughout the region.

--- [Page 2] ---


--- [Page 3] ---
The Nalanda-Sriwijaya Series , established under the publishing 
programme of ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, Singapo re, has been 
created as a publications avenue for the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre. The 
Centre focuses on the ways in which Asian polities and societies have 
interacted over time. To this end, the series invites submissions which  
engage with Asian historical connectivities. Such works might examine 
political relations between states; the trading, fi nancial and other 
networks which connected regions; cultural, linguistic and intellectual 
interactions between societies; or religious links across and between 
large parts of Asia.
ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute (formerly the Institute of Southeast 
Asian Studies) was established as an autonomous organization in 1968. 
It is a regional centre dedicated to the study of socio-political, security 
and economic trends and developments in Southeast Asia and its wider 
geostrategic and economic environment.
The Institute’s research programmes are the Regiona l Economic  
Studies (RES, including ASEAN and APEC), Regional Strategic and 
Political Studies (RSPS), and Regional Social and C ultural Studies  
(RSCS).
ISEAS Publishing , an established academic press, has issued  
more than 2,000 books and journals. It is the largest scholarly publisher  
of research about Southeast Asia from within the re gion. ISEAS 
Publications works with many other academic and tra de publishers  
and distributors to disseminate important research and analyses from and 
about Southeast Asia to the rest of the world.
00 Spirits & Ships-PrelimsIT-6P.indd   2 17/2/17   2:45 pm

--- [Page 4] ---


--- [Page 5] ---
First published in Singapore in 2017 by
ISEAS Publishing
30 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, Pasir Panjang
Singapore 119614
E-mail : publish@iseas.edu.sg
Website : bookshop.iseas.edu.sg
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the  
ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
© 2017 ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, Singapore
The responsibility for facts and opinions in this publication rests exclusively with the 
authors and their interpretations do not necessarily relect the views or the policy of 
the publisher or its supporters.
ISEAS Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Spirits and Ships : Cultural Transfers in Early Monsoon Asia / editors, Andrea Acri, 
Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann.
1. Asia—Civilization.
2. Asia—Relations.
I. Acri, Andrea, 1981-
II. Blench, R.
III. Landmann, Alexandra.
DS12 S75      2017
ISBN 978-981-47-6275-5 (soft cover)
ISBN 978-981-47-6277-9 (E-book PDF)
Typeset by International Typesetters Pte Ltd
Printed in Singapore by Mainland Press Pte Ltd
00 Spirits & Ships-PrelimsIT-6P.indd   4 17/2/17   2:45 pm

--- [Page 6] ---
CONTENTS
About the Contributors vii
Map of Monsoon Asia ix
1.	 Introduction:	Re-connecting	Histories	 across	 the	 Indo-Paciic	 1
 Andrea Acri, Roger Blench and Alexandra Landmann 
2.  Fearsome Bleeding, Boogeyman Gods and Chaos Victorious: 38 
A Conjectural History of Insular South Asian Religious  
Tropes
 Robert Dentan
3. Tantrism “Seen from the East” 71
 Andrea Acri
4. Can We Reconstruct a “Malayo-Javanic” Law Area? 145
 Alexandra Landmann
5. Ethnographic and Archaeological Correlates for an 207 
Mainland Southeast Asia Linguistic Area
 Roger Blench
6. Was There a Late Prehistoric Integrated Southeast Asian 239 
Maritime Space? Insight from Settlements and Industries
 Bérénice Bellina
7. Looms, Weaving and the Austronesian Expansion 273
 Christopher Buckley
00 Spirits & Ships-PrelimsIT-6P.indd   5 17/2/17   2:45 pm

--- [Page 7] ---
vi Contents
8. Pre-Austronesian Origins of Seafaring in Insular Southeast 325 
Asia
 Waruno Mahdi
9. The Role of “Prakrit” in Maritime Southeast Asia through 375 
101 Etymologies
 Tom Hoogervorst
10. Who Were the First Malagasy, and What Did They Speak? 441
 Alexander Adelaar
11.	 Śāstric	and	Austronesian	 Comparative	Perspectives:	Parallel	 470  
Frameworks on Indic Architectural and Cultural Translations 
among Western Malayo-Polynesian Societies
 Imran bin Tajudeen
12. The Lord of the Land Relationship in Southeast Asia 515
 Robert Wessing
Index 557
00 Spirits & Ships-PrelimsIT-6P.indd   6 17/2/17   2:45 pm

--- [Page 8] ---
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
Andrea Acri  (PhD 2011, Leiden University) is Maître de Conférences 
in Tantric Studies at the École Pratique des Hautes Études (Paris) and 
Associate Fellow at the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre (Singapore). 
Alexander Adelaar  is a principal Fellow in the Asia Institute at the 
University of Melbourne. His research is about the structure and history 
of Austronesian languages in West Indonesia and Malaysia, Madagascar 
and Taiwan. 
Bérénice Bellina  is Senior Researcher at the National Centre for 
Scientiic	 Research	 (France).	 She	 specializes	 on	 South	 and	 Southeast	
Asian archaeology, and is the Director of the Thai– French Archaeological 
Mission in Upper Thai–Malay Peninsula since 2005.
Roger Blench is Visiting Fellow at the McDonald Institute for 
Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, and International 
Research	Oficer	at	the	Department	of	History,	University	of	Jos,	Plateau	
State, Nigeria.
Christopher Buckley  (D.Phil Wolfson College, Oxford University, 
1987) is an independent scholar and a Member of the Common Room 
at Wolfson College (Oxford).
Robert Dentan  is Professor Emeritus of Anthropology and American 
Studies at the State University of New York, University at Buffalo.
00 Spirits & Ships-PrelimsIT-6P.indd   7 17/2/17   2:45 pm

--- [Page 9] ---
 About the Contributors
Tom Hoogervorst  (PhD 2013, University of Oxford) is a researcher 
at the Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean 
Studies (Leiden).
Imran bin Tajudeen  (PhD 2009, National University of Singapore) is 
Assistant Professor at the Department of Architecture, School of Design 
and Environment, National University of Singapore.
Alexandra Landmann (MA and PhD Goethe University, Frankfurt) was 
a Research Fellow at Peace Research Institute Frankfurt, 2009–11, and 
Visiting Fellow at Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre (Singapore) in 2013. She 
lectured at the Indonesian Hindu University from 20 11–15 and is currently 
ICGSE and IB Teacher for Environmental Management at GMIS Bali.
Waruno Mahdi  (M.A. and Chem. Eng. 1965, Mendeleyev Institute of 
Chemical Technology, Moscow) is post-retirement part-time technical 
assistant at the Department of Physical Chemistry, Fritz Haber Institute 
(Berlin) of the Max Planck Society, and has done freelance historical 
linguistics since 1972. 
Robert Wessing  (PhD 1974, University of Illinois, Urbana) is a retired 
anthropologist who last taught at Leiden University. 
00 Spirits & Ships-PrelimsIT-6P.indd   8 17/2/17   2:45 pm

--- [Page 10] ---
Map of Monsoon Asia
Source :	Courtesy	of	Andrea	Acri	(modiied	from	ile	Asie.svg,	by	user	Gerge,	via	Wikimedia	Commons,	< https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Asie-color.svg>).
00 Spirits & Ships-PrelimsIT-6P.indd   9 17/2/17   2:45 pm