--- [Page 1] ---


--- [Page 2] ---


--- [Page 3] ---
The ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute  (formerly Institute of Southeast Asian Studies) 
is an autonomous organization established in 1968. It is a regional centre dedicated 
to the study of socio-political, security, and economic trends and developments 
in Southeast Asia and its wider geostrategic and economic environment. The 
Institute’s research programmes are grouped under Regional Economic Studies 
(RES), Regional Strategic and Political Studies (RSPS), and Regional Social 
and Cultural Studies (RSCS). The Institute is also home to the ASEAN Studies 
Centre (ASC), the Temasek History Research Centre (THRC) and the Singapore 
APEC Study Centre.
ISEAS Publishing , an established academic press, has issued more than 
2,000 books and journals. It is the largest scholarly publisher of research about 
Southeast Asia from within the region. ISEAS Publishing works with many other 
academic and trade publishers and distributors to disseminate important research 
and analyses from and about Southeast Asia to the rest of the world.

--- [Page 4] ---


--- [Page 5] ---
Published in Singapore in 2019 by
ISEAS Publishing
30 Heng Mui Keng Terrace
Singapore 119614
E-mail: publish@iseas.edu.sg
Website: <http://bookshop.iseas.edu.sg>
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.
© 2019 ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, Singapore
The responsibility for facts and opinions in this publication rests exclusively with the 
authors and their interpretations do not necessarily reflect the views or the policy of 
the publisher or its supporters.
ISEAS Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Names: Acri, Andrea, 1981–, editor. | Ghani, Kashshaf, editor. | Jhā, Murārī K., editor . |  
Mukherjee, Sraman, editor.
Title: Imagining Asia(s) : Networks, Actors, Sites / edited by Andrea Acri, Kashshaf 
Ghani, Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee.
Description: Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, 2019. | Series: Nalanda-
Sriwijaya Centre Series ; NSC29 | Includes bibliographical references.
Identifiers: ISBN 9789814818858 (paperback) | ISBN 9789814818865 (PDF)
Subjects: LCSH: Asia--Civilization.
Classification: LCC DS12 I31
Typeset by Superskill Graphics Pte Ltd
Printed in Singapore by Mainland Press Pte Ltd

--- [Page 6] ---
Contents
List of Contributors  vii
Introduction 1
Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, Murari K. Jha, Sraman Mukherjee
Part I: Conceptualizing the Region: Past and Present
1. Locating Asia, Arresting Asia: Grappling with 
“The Epistemology that Kills” 17
 Farish A. Noor
2. Imagining “Maritime Asia” 36
 Andrea Acri
3. In Search of an Asian Vision: The Asian Relations 
Conference of 1947 60
 Gopa Sabharwal
Part II: Conceptualizing Asia through the Prism of Europe
4. In Pursuit of Knowledge from Asia: François Valentijn on  
the Hindu Social Divisions in the Coromandel Region,  
c. Seventeenth–Eighteenth Century 93  
Murari K. Jha
5. British Romantic Poetics and the Idea of Asia 125
 Anjana Sharma
Part III: Networks of Knowledge Across the Indian Ocean
6. An Indian Ocean Ribāṭ: War and Religion in  
Sixteenth-Century Ponnāni, Malabar Coast  147
 Mahmood Kooria

--- [Page 7] ---
vi Contents
7. Travelling Spirits: Revisiting Melaka’s Keramat  from  
the Indian Ocean  175
 Fernando Rosa
Part IV: Histories and Geographies of Pilgrimage in Asia
8. Transmissions, Translations, Reconstitutions: Revisiting 
Geographies of Buddha Relics in the Southern Asian Worlds 215
 Sraman Mukherjee
9. The Politics of Pilgrimage: Reception of Hajj among  
South Asian Muslims 251
 Kashshaf Ghani
Part V: Trans-Local Dynamics and Intra-Asian Connections  
across Space and Time
10. Sanskritic Buddhism as an Asian Universalism 275
 Iain Sinclair
11. Interconnectedness and Mobility in the Middle  
Ages/Nowadays: From Baghdad to Chang’an and from  
Istanbul to Tokyo 334
 Federica A. Broilo
12. Connecting Networks and Orienting Space:  
Relocating Nguyen Cochinchina between East and  
Southeast Asia in the Sixteenth and Eighteenth Centuries 358
 Vu Duc Liem
13. The Highlands of West Sumatra and their Maritime Trading 
Connections 393 
Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz
Index  425

--- [Page 8] ---
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
Andrea Acri  (PhD Leiden University, 2011) is Maître de conférences  
(Assistant Professor) in Tantric Studies at the École Pratique des Hautes 
Études (EPHE, PSL University, Paris) since 2016. Prior to that, he has held 
research and teaching positions in India (Nalanda University), Singapore 
(Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre at the ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, and Asia 
Research Institute at the National University of Singapore), Australia 
(Australian National University), and the Netherlan ds (International Institute 
for Asian Studies, Leiden). His main research interests include Shaiva and 
Buddhist tantric traditions in South and Southeast Asia, as well as wider 
cultural and historical dynamics of Intra-Asian connectivity.
Federica A. Broilo  is currently an Adjunct Professor at the University of 
Urbino “Carlo Bo” where she teaches Islamic Art and Architecture. She 
has been Assistant Professor at the Department of History of Art at Mardin 
Artuklu University, Turkey until December 2015. She holds a PhD in 
Oriental Studies from Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy (2009). She 
is especially interested in the relation between water, light and architectural 
spaces in the Mediterranean world and beyond.
Kashshaf Ghani  is currently Assistant Professor at the School of Historical 
Studies, Nalanda University, India. He specializes on premodern South 
Asia covering the years 1000–1800 CE. His research covers society, 
politics, religion and cultural interactions in this region, with a focus on 
the History of Sufism, its practices, rituals, and networks; Indo-Persian 
history; community interactions; cosmopolitan cultures; and South Asian 
languages. He also researches in areas of Asian int erconnections; historical 
connections of South Asia with West and Central Asia; Muslim networks 
in Asia; and travel and transregionalism in Muslim societies.

--- [Page 9] ---
viii The Contributors
Murari Kumar Jha  is currently a Visiting Fellow at the Weatherhead 
Centre for International Affairs, Harvard University (2018–19). Earlier, 
between 2015 and 2018, Dr Jha worked as an Assistant Professor at the 
School of Historical Studies, Nalanda University. Prior to joining Nalanda, 
he was a Research Fellow in the Department of History, NUS, during 2013 
and 2014. After completing his studies at Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
New Delhi, Dr  Jha pursued his higher studies at Leiden Universit y between 
2006 and 2013, where he wrote his PhD dissertation, “The Political 
Economy of the Ganga River: Highway of State Format ion in Mughal India, 
c.1600–1800”. Dr Jha is currently working on a monograph tentatively 
titled “River and Empire: An Economic and Environmental History of the 
Ganga in Mughal India, c.1500–1800”.
Mahmood Kooria  is a postdoctoral researcher at Leiden University, the 
Netherlands. Earlier he was a research fellow at the International Institute 
for Asian Studies (IIAS) and African Studies Centre (ASC), Leiden and 
the Dutch Institute in Morocco (NIMAR), Rabat. He did his PhD at the 
Leiden University Institute for history on the circulation of Islamic legal 
ideas and texts across the Indian Ocean and Mediterranean worlds. With 
Michael N. Pearson he has edited Malabar in the Indian Ocean World: 
Cosmopolitanism in a Maritime Historical Region (Oxford University 
Press, 2018). He has published in several peer-reviewed journals such as 
the Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient ; Annales. 
Histoire, Sciences Sociales ; Law & History Review ; Oxford Journal of 
Law and Religion ; and Itinerario .
Sraman Mukherjee  (PhD Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta 
and University of Calcutta, 2010) is Assistant Professor in the Department 
of Visual Arts at Ashoka University (India). Trained as a historian of 
colonial and early postcolonial South Asia, his work explores the interface 
between the past and the present in the constitution of the disciplinary and 
institutional domains of art history, archaeology a nd museums; biographies 
of material traces (sites, objects, and monuments); and histories of the 
inter-Asian circulation of objects, ideas, and peop le. Before joining 
Ashoka University, Sraman held postdoctoral research positions at the 
International Institute for Asian Studies (Leiden), at the Royal Netherlands 
Institute for Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies (KITLV , Leiden), and 
in the Department of Art History and the Institute for Advanced Study at 
the University of Minnesota (Minneapolis); and teaching positions in the 
Department of History at Presidency University (Calcutta, India) and in 
the School of Historical Studies at Nalanda University (Rajgir, India).

--- [Page 10] ---
The Contributors ix
Farish A. Noor  is Associate Professor at the S. Rajaratnam School of 
International Studies (RSIS) and the School of History, College of the 
Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences (COHASS), Nanyang Technological 
University (NTU), Singapore. His work has been focused on Southeast 
Asian history and politics, with a particular emphasis on the colonial era 
in the nineteenth century. His latest works include America’ s Encounters 
With Southeast Asia 1800–1900: Before the Pivot  (Amsterdam University 
Press, 2018).
Fernando Rosa  is a Brazilian anthropologist and historian who ha s worked 
on and lived in various Indian Ocean societies, particularly South Africa 
(Cape Town), India (Kerala and Goa), Peninsular Malaysia (mostly Kuala 
Lumpur and Melaka), Macau (China), and Indonesia. He has also lived 
and worked in Atlantic societies such as Brazil and parts of the Caribbean 
(including Martinique, Suriname, Aruba, and Curaçao ). He is now a research 
affiliate with the English department, Stellenbosch University, South Africa. 
His mains fields are African studies and Indian Ocean studies. His research 
interests lie in the domain of oceanic intellectual networks and related 
languages (and their archives), as well as in processes of creolization and 
cosmopolitanism.
Gopa Sabharwal  founded the undergraduate Department of Sociology at 
India’s foremost liberal Arts college, Lady Shri Ra m College for Women, in 
1993. She was a Fulbright Scholar in Residence in 2 006 at Chatham College 
for Women (now Chatham University), Pittsburgh. Fro m 2010 to 2016, she 
served as founding Vice Chancellor of Nalanda University, entrusted with 
giving shape to the vision of establishing a new Na landa for the twenty-first 
century—a unique international, research-focused po stgraduate University 
with a focus on inter-Asian relations, an interdisciplinary curriculum, 
and a unique pedagogy. Her books include Ethnicity and Class: Social 
Divisions in an Indian City (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2006); 
The Indian Millennium—AD 1000 to AD 2000 (Penguin India, 2000); and 
India Since 1947: The Independent Years (Penguin Random House India, 
2017) . Her research interests focus on ethnic identities, urban India, visual 
anthropology, and the history of society.
Anjana Sharma  teaches at the Department of English, Delhi University. 
She was Founding Dean, Academic Planning at Nalanda University from 
2011 to 2015. She was the recipient of a Fulbright Fellowship in 2001 
and was Senior Fellow at the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre, ISEAS – Yusof 
Ishak Institute, in 2016. Her research interests span revolutionary print and 

--- [Page 11] ---
visual culture, British literature of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth 
century, and questions of gender. Her most representative works are The 
Autobiography of Desire: English Women Novelists of the 1790s (2004), 
the edited Frankenstein: Gender, Culture, and Identity (2004), and the co-
edited Agamemnon’ s Mask: Greek Tragedy and Beyond (2007). Her recent 
scholarship is related to examining the representation of the critical year 
1947 in Indian history and the representation of MK Gandhi in English 
language newspapers. The Nalanda experience focused on the rich seam 
of inter-Asian interactions and resulted in the editing of two significant 
volumes:  Civilizational Dialogue: Asian Interconnections an d Cross 
Cultural Exchanges  (2013) and Records, Recoveries, Remnants and Inter-
Asian Interconnections: Decoding Cultural Heritage  (2018).
Iain Sinclair  is currently a Visiting Fellow at ISEAS – Yusof Is hak Institute. 
He has studied the art and literature of Sanskritic civilization for over two 
decades (MA Hons, 2000; PhD, 2016). His doctoral dissertation focused 
on the transitional period of tantric and monastic Buddhism in Nepal.
Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz  is teaching Southeast Asian culture and archaeolog y 
in various universities. She has a PhD in Art History from Technische 
Universität Darmstadt, Germany, and an MA in Art History, Archaeology, 
and Southeast Asian regional studies from the Johann Wolfgang Goethe 
Universität in Frankfurt am Main. She was a Visiting Fellow with the 
Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre at the ISEAS – Yusof Ishak  Institute in Singapore 
and served as a research assistant for excavations conducted on Sumatra, 
Indonesia in 2003–8 and 2011–14. Her main interests are architecture, 
maritime cultural heritage, gold jewellery, settlem ent and missionary 
history in Southeast Asia.
Vũ Đức Liêm  is Lecturer in History at Hanoi National University of 
Education (HNUE), Vietnam. He is finishing his dissertation on the early 
nineteenth century Vietnamese political history at Hamburg University, 
Germany. He previously obtained undergraduate and graduate degrees in 
History at HNUE, Chulalongkorn University (Thailand), and a graduate 
fellowship at the National University of Singapore. His area of research 
covers early modern Vietnamese warfare, geopolitics, and political history.x The Contributors

--- [Page 12] ---
1INTRODUCTION
Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, Murari K. Jha 
and Sraman Mukherjee
This edited volume stems from the conference “Imagi ning Asia(s): 
Networks, Actors, Sites” held at ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute in October 
2016, jointly organized by the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre (Singapore) and 
Nalanda University (India). This event, bringing toget her fourteen scholars 
from various countries, constituted a landmark for the collaboration 
between the two institutions and, we believe, also a gesture towards the 
academic and intellectual “rapprochement” between two regions of the 
world—South and Southeast Asia—whose deeply connected histories 
have been forgotten for a long time, and need now, more than ever,  
to be (re)conceptualized as an integrated phenomeno n. Indeed, the 
intellectual agenda driving this conference has bee n an engagement with the 
idea of “Asia” in the frame of Area Studies scholar ship and, at the same time,  
a commitment to the study of Intra-Asian networks and connections that 
has been the hallmark of recent scholarship, including the very series in 
which this volume has been published.
Asia has long been perceived as a clear and distinc t geographical unit. 
As a continent lying to the east of Europe, it has been malleable to different 
imaginations and politics. Area studies scholarship , for example, has carved 
Asia into the seemingly self-contained regions of W est and Central Asia, 
South and Southeast Asia, and East Asia. These regi onal configurations 
reÀect more the changing (geo)political and economi c interests in 
these areas rather than any of their historical or cultural roots. Recent 
scholarship, however, has presented Asia as a cultu ral entity produced 
through political imaginations located in specific h istorical contexts, and  

--- [Page 13] ---
2 Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee
revealed the arbitrariness of the Area Studies divide.1 More importantly, 
it has advanced the question as to what Asia is, an d as to whether there 
existed one or many Asia(s).2
Following the lead of such scholarship, this conference sought to 
explore Asian societies as interconnected formations through trajectories/
networks of circulation of people, ideas, and objects in the longue durée . 
Moving beyond the divides of conventional Area Studies scholarship and 
the arbitrary borders set by late colonial empires and the rise of post-
colonial nation-states, this conference mapped critically the configuration 
of contact zones in which mobile bodies, minds, and cultures interact to 
foster new images, identities, and imaginations of Asia. Offering some 
historiographical reÀections and, at the same time,  presenting novel 
research trajectories, the conference addressed such questions as: When 
does the idea of Asia (and regions) come into being, and how far back 
in time can we trace these spatial imagination(s)? What are the logistical 
aspects governing the routes—overland and maritime—that linked up 
different regions of Asia?  What roles did imperial formations (old and 
new, European and non-European) play in shaping Asia? Do ideas of 
nationalism and post-colonial nation-states fracture Asia?
The ancient Greeks employed the term Asia to denote the eastern 
inhabited world in their spatial imagination. More than being a geographic 
region located on the map, Asia is a broad concept that can meaningfully be 
understood to shed further light on the processes o f globalization that signify 
the growing interconnections among regions, cultures, ideas, economies 
and polities. Prasenjit Duara (2010) and other scholars have highlighted 
the richness and polysemy of the category of Asia and its potential for 
understanding the contemporary world. Just as “Asia”—and its subregions 
of South, Central, Southeast, and East Asia—are construed as conceptual 
categories, a similar case can be made for the terms such as “Indies” or  
“East Indies” ( Oost Indiën ) often employed since the early-modern period. 
The term “India” or “Indies” covered many regions t o the east of the Persian 
Gulf and included the Malay Peninsula and the Indonesian Archipelago. 
1 See, e.g., Ali (2009), Bose (2006), Chaudhuri (1993), Subrahmanyam (1997), Frank 
(1998), Lewis and Wigen (1997), Noor (2016), and Singh and Dhar (2014).
2 Among the most recent contributions are Duara (2010), Subrahmanyam (2016 and 1997), 
Acharya (2013), Milner and Johnson (2001), and Frey and Spakowski (2015).

--- [Page 14] ---
Introduction 3
“India”, and the phrase “the countries of the sea”, were already employed 
by the Persia-based seafaring community of Nestorian Christians in the 
first millennium CE (Colless 1969, pp. 21–22). If Asia can be perceived 
as a hallmark of interconnections at multiple levels throughout eastern 
Eurasia, the East Indies can be understood as one of the core regions where 
such processes unfolded during the pre-modern, early modern and colonial 
periods. Historians of the Indian Ocean such as K.N. Chaudhuri (1985), 
and more recently Michael Pearson (2003) and Sugata Bose (2006), have 
shown how the Indian Subcontinent and the adjoining regions constituted 
the fulcrum around which much of the economic, cultural, and political 
contacts gravitated between East Africa and the China Sea.
Rather than giving primacy to an arbitrarily defined  geographic 
category, Asia can be visualized as a zone or discursive field of intensified 
interconnections intertwining almost every aspects of human society. 
Any attempts to chart out an imagined geographical construct such as 
Asia inevitably “also make manifest the impossibilities and potential of 
mapping Global Asias, that conceptually determined site that insists on its 
own indeterminacy and plurality as much as its global expanse.” (Chen 
2017, p. vii). Conceptual impossibilities aside, a working geographical 
construct of Asia may be defined as including the continental landmass 
between “the Pontic Steppe, the Mediterranean Sea and the Sinai Desert 
in the West; Japan, the Philippines, and the Pacific Ocean in the East; the 
Arctic Sea in the North; and the Indian Ocean and Indonesian Archipelago 
in the South.” (Fairey and Farrell 2018, p. 6). While this vast swathe of 
geography can be taken as indicative of the heterogeneity that the region 
recognized as Asia signifies, an exciting line of enquiry is to look for 
translocal phenomena including parallelisms, synchr onisms, and processual 
continuities, or, to say it with Andrew Abalahin (2011, p. 664), to reframe 
“a series of world-historical developments that bri ng together histories that 
have customarily been viewed apart”.
At our historical juncture characterized by growing globalization and 
regional integration, and at the turn of what is regarded to be the “Asian 
Century”, scholarship is increasingly formulating a lternative configurations 
to conceptualize Asian spaces and phenomena that are not bound to a static 
geographical model, let alone geopolitical continge ncies, but that are rather 
the expression of dynamic processes of transfer thr ough networks of human 
agents, Àora and fauna, material objects, etc. Research focusing on such 
translocal relationships is not a new phenomenon: novel conceptualization 
of macro-regions, spaces, or cultural phenomena spanning across (and 
beyond) Asia that transcend the boundaries of the Area Studies paradigm  

--- [Page 15] ---
4 Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee
have been developed on the basis of old ideas, namely the overland 
and maritime Silk Roads (von Richthofen 1877; Chava nnes 1903), 
Monsoon Asia (Mus 1933), or Eurasia (McNeill 1963; Goody 2010); 
new or fine-tuned models include Sino-Pacifica (Abalahin 2011), =omia 
(van Schendel 2002), Maritime Asia (Guillot, Lombard and Ptak 1998), 
and the Bay of Bengal Interaction Sphere (Gupta 2005), to name just 
a few. Innovative scholarship emphasizing a comparative perspective 
has also focused on social dynamics and their relationship to the human 
and natural environments, namely borderlands vs. centres, maritime and 
coastal communities (or “water civilizations”) vs. highland communities, 
Insular vs. Mainland, state spaces vs. stateless peoples, etc.; the circulation 
and appropriation of languages and body of texts across Asia, such as 
the Sanskrit Cosmopolis and Vernacular Millennium (Pollock 2006), the 
Islamicate and Persianate worlds (Ho 2006), Sinosphere and Indosphere 
(Matisoff 1990); religious phenomena, such as the Axial Age (Jaspers 
1953), the ĝaiva Age (Sanderson 2009), the Pali Cosmopolis/Buddhist 
Ecumene (Frasch 2017), and the Demonological Cosmop olis (White 
2012); the Indian Ocean (and the sea in general) as an unifying factor 
in Asian history (Chaudhuri 1985, Pearson 2003); and other historical 
dynamics such as networks and synchronisms (Lombard 1995), “strange 
parallels” (Lieberman 2003, 2009), convergence (Kulke 1990, 2014), etc. 
Also notable is the recent resurgence of temporal categories such as the 
“Medieval” and the “Early Modern” as tools to elaborate new models for 
global history (see, e.g., Holmes and Standen 2018;  Strathern 2018), which 
are especially relevant in bringing out the interconnected and dynamic 
nature of Asia across time.
Situating itself within this intellectual agenda, the present volume 
challenges the set boundaries of Area Studies and sets out to explore Asian 
societies, cultures, and identities as interconnected formations through 
trajectories of circulation of people, ideas, and artefacts in the longue durée .
CONTENTS OF THE VOLUME
The collective body of work presented in this volume includes select 
papers from the conference, as well as two papers f rom invited contributors 
(Kooria and Rosa). Part I, “Conceptualizing the Region: Past and Present”, 
groups three chapters setting the intellectual stage of the volume through 
a consideration of relevant theoretical and historiographical issues 
foregrounding the scholarly (re)conceptualizations of Asia on the one hand, 
and discussing the idea of Asia in the context of key events and cultural 

--- [Page 16] ---
Introduction 5
trends of the twentieth century that have had an impact on subsequent 
geopolitical and socio-cultural developments on the other.
Chapter  1, “Locating Asia, Arresting Asia: Grappling with  
‘the Epistemology That Kills’ ” by Farish Noor problematizes the modern 
and contemporary political boundaries of Asia drawn in the nineteenth 
century and appropriated by post-colonial states. In unpacking the issues 
of naming, identity, modernity, and postmodern global capitalism in the 
context of framing and imagining Asia(s), Noor reminds the reader of 
Todorov and Cohn’s warning about the workings of an epistemology that 
kills and arrests, and the investigative modalities that have been used to 
fix the meaning of signifiers. Modern Asian history is as much a history 
of modernity as it is a history of Asia, and scholars cannot hope to situate 
themselves radically outside the discursive economy of modernity, despite 
the fact that today we are all too aware of the pits and traps that lie within 
its regulated parameters. The chapter suggests a po ssible way to discuss the 
meaning of Asia, and locates that object of discussion without locking it 
permanently within a grid of determined meanings and values that reduces 
and essentializes.
Chapter  2, “Imagining ‘Maritime Asia’  ” by Andrea Acri tries to 
reconceptualize (i.e., reimagine) geopolitical configurations of Asia as 
framed by the current Area Studies paradigm though the prism of the socio-
spatial construction of “Maritime Asia”. Acri advoc ates a borderless history 
(and geography) of the largely maritime and littora l swathe of territory from 
the Indian Ocean littorals to the Western Pacific in the longue durée  that takes 
into account long-distance connections and dynamics  of religious interaction. 
Having surveyed the genealogy of the expression “Maritime Asia”, Acri 
describes this dynamic macro-region of intersecting  discursive fields across 
which networks of cultural brokers travelled since time immemorial, 
regarding it as forming—just like Eurasia—one interconnected network 
with a shared background of human, intellectual, an d environmental history.  
The chapter then applies the concept of Maritime Asia to the study of the 
genesis and circulation of Sanskritic Buddhism(s) across the region from 
the third to the fourteenth century and beyond, and offers some concluding 
reÀections situating the concept in the intellectual trajectory of such terms 
as “Eurasia”, “Monsoon Asia”, and the “Indian Ocean World”.
Chapter  3, “In Search of an Asian Vision: The Asian Relations 
Conference of 1947” by Gopa Sabharwal captures the idea of Asia set 
forth at the 1st Asian Relations Conference that took place in New Delhi in 
March–April 1947, as a non-political and non-official event. The objective 
of the conference, attended by 250 delegates from thirty-three countries, 

--- [Page 17] ---
6 Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee
including such leading personalities as Mr Gandhi, Pandit Nehru, Dr  Sutan 
Sjahrir, and Mrs Sarojini Naidu, was “to bring together the leading men 
and women of Asia on a common platform to study the problems of 
common concern to the people of the continent”. This was the first attempt 
in modern times of the countries of Asia to come together, and therefore 
all the speeches echoed the coming together of Asia.
Part II, “Conceptualizing Asia through the Prism of Eur ope”, 
discusses the perception, and constitution, of Asia and ideas about Asia 
as formulated in European intellectual circles of the early modern and  
modern periods.
Chapter 4, “In Pursuit of Knowledge from Asia: François Valentijn on 
the Hindu Social Divisions in the Coromandel Region, c. Seventeenth–
Eighteenth Century” by Murari K. Jha discusses the knowledge transfer 
between Asia and Europe along the trade networks of the Indian Ocean 
operated by the Dutch East India Company. More specifically, the chapter 
pays attention to the Western European curiosity to know the Eastern 
world and society. In post-Enlightenment Europe, su ch curiosity for 
the knowledge about Asia was deployed to understand and redefine the 
European self in contrast to the Asian Other. In doing this exercise, and 
by focusing primarily on the work of François Valentijn, Jha examines the 
activities of the Europeans to dig deeper in generating knowledge about 
the southeastern Indian society and how such knowledge was transferred 
to the European reading public.
Chapter 5, “British Romantic Poetics and the Idea of Asia” by Anjana 
Sharma explores how the “discovery” of Asia in the eighteenth century by 
the British forever altered the cultural and political aesthetics of writers, 
thinkers, philosophers and poets who began to constitute the Republic 
of Letters in Great Britain. As the British imperial juggernaut rolled 
on it sought to erase ancient civilizational pathways and began to very 
consciously recast Asia in terms of its own cultural, literary and political 
referentiality. Ideas of Asia took shape and were transmitted from imperial 
sites and were circulated transnationally. Consequentially, what emerged 
in the nineteenth century British imaginary was an Asia that was defined 
by geography yet transcended borders: an Asia that was fundamentally 
displaced from its core principles of cultural syncretism that coexisted 
within its robust multiple philosophical and literary traditions. Discussing 
key literary works, such as Coleridge’s iconic Kubla Khan , the Bryronic 
“Eastern” tale The Giaour , Shelley’s Prometheus Unbound , and Keats 
unfinished Hyperions , Sharma argues that the afterlife of the Romantic 
endeavour still shapes the idea of a monolithic Asia in global literary 

--- [Page 18] ---
Introduction 7
studies, despite the significant inroads made by Edward Said and others 
who have interrogated and dismantled these (mis)readings.
Part III, “Networks of Knowledge Across the Indian Ocean”, groups 
two papers focusing on the Àuid contact zone includ ing the countries around 
the Bay of Bengal, which can be analysed as the theatre of cultural and 
material transfer since time immemorial. In so doing, it delineates a more 
coherent geography of knowledge transfer across geographical, ethnic, 
and linguistic boundaries. This perspective further highlights that post-war 
truncation of Asia into the area studies divisions such as South Asia and 
Southeast Asia is problematic and least useful for historical enquiry, as 
much as an arbitrary and reified distinction between “Asia” and “Europe”.
Chapter 6, “An Indian Ocean 5iEāṭ : War and Religion in Sixteenth-
Century Ponnāni, Malabar Coast” by Mahmood Kooria explores the 
concept and practice of riEāṭ  to understand the ways in which the Muslims 
perceived and conceptualized their conÀicts in the sixteenth-century Indian 
Ocean. 5iEāṭ , a term and concept originally derived from the ce ntral Islamic 
lands and texts, was used by the authors of jihadi-treatises in Malabar to 
identify their physical struggles as well as their locatedness in Islamic 
history. Based on treatises written in Arabic, Kooria examines how such a 
“peripheral” Muslim community imagined itself and its worldviews while 
living under non-Muslim rulers, the =amorins, and cooperating with them 
in the warfront. Describing the concept of riEāṭ  and its applicability to a 
non-Middle Eastern Indian Ocean context, and focusing on one particular 
and important micro-region within Malabar called Ponnāni, the author 
suggests that concepts like “frontier zones” do not make justice to the 
nuances of the coastal communities who fought against the Portuguese 
intrusions without being part of a larger frontier to an imperial centre.
Chapter 7, “Travelling Spirits: Revisiting Melaka’s Keramat  from the 
Indian Ocean” by Fernando Rosa takes a comparative look at keramat  
in Melaka and the Indian Ocean. Rosa uses theoretical insights from 
comparative religion as well as Indian Ocean histories, especially those 
connecting South and Southeast Asia, in order to understand local historic 
structures. In this wide-ranging chapter, he reinserts keramat —today seen as 
Islamic saintly shrines—within the ancient historie s of the Indian Ocean and 
its broad religious networks. He also engages in an extended discussion of the 
meaning of keramat  within certain streams of thought in the larger Islamic 
tradition, especially in the twentieth century. In particular, he examines the 
work of Abdul A’la Maududi, emphasizing in this way  the wider framework 
of doctrinal objections to keramat . Moreover, on the basis of recent 
path-breaking work, Rosa indicates that the ancient Austroasiatic (and,  

--- [Page 19] ---
8 Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee
perhaps, tantric?) religious and cultural matrix encompassing both South 
and Southeast Asia is importantly rooted in a shared notion of feminine 
power and deities. That notion survives in modern Nusantara, as suggested 
by Braginsky for Sumatra, but in a state of tension with doctrinal forms 
of Islam. Finally, Rosa suggests that the ancient, deep-rooted histories of 
creolization of South and Southeast Asia are relevant also as religious and 
cultural resources for today’s predicament of globalized jihadist violence.
Part IV , “Histories and Geographies of Pilgrimage in Asia”, includes 
two chapters exploring the role of pilgrimage in th e complex dynamics that 
shaped intra-Asian connections, which could in turn contribute to question 
and reorient our contemporary perceptions about socio-cultural, religious, 
and ethnic identities across the regions of South Asia, Southeast Asia, and 
the Middle East in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Chapter 8, “Transmissions, Translations, Reconstitutions: Revisiting 
Geographies of Buddha Relics in the Southern Asian Worlds” by Sraman 
Mukherjee traces the circulating lives of Buddha’s relics across colonial 
South and mainland Southeast Asia. The chapter investigates the changing 
semantics, contexts, and contents of material reconstitution of Buddhist 
corporeal relics as they travelled from archaeological sites and museums 
to practising Buddhist temples. It develops around one particular case of 
a Buddhist corporeal relic and retraces its journey from an excavation site 
near Peshawar (presently in Pakistan) to its current location in a new relic 
temple in Mandalay (in Myanmar) in the opening years of the twentieth 
century. Mapping the changing institutional, cultural, and political locations 
of this and similar relics, Mukherjee explores how Buddhist corporeal 
relics accrued certain meaning, value, and visibility through a network of 
social relations created by gift, exchange, market economy, and political 
diplomacy. In so doing, he revisits the role of the modern state formations 
in shaping the domain of Area Studies scholarship.
Chapter  9, “The Politics of Pilgrimage: Reception of Hajj among South 
Asian Muslims” by Kashshaf Ghani discusses the growing trend among 
early twentieth-century Bengali Muslims to look beyond their immediate 
borders in an attempt to connect with Muslim societies in West Asia, 
particularly with regard to the Ottoman-supported Sharif administration 
and its policies towards the hajj pilgrims. Ghani looks into the multiple 
ways such events reÀecting the political and religious environment in the 
Hejaz were being read and interpreted by Bengali Muslims. He argues that 
the community, though located at one far end of the Islamic world, could 
not isolate itself from the implications of such political turmoil on the 
holy ritual of hajj. Changes in the political climate attracted much reaction 

--- [Page 20] ---
Introduction 9
from within the community, and Muslim periodicals in Bengali played a 
leading role in carrying this news to the Muslim masses in Bengal. Two 
periodicals— Chholtan and Ahl i-Hadith— are taken into account in the 
chapter, in an attempt to read trends of transregionalism among Muslims 
in twentieth century Bengal.
Part V , “Trans-Local Dynamics and Intra-Asian Connections across 
Space and Time”, closes the volume by grouping four chapters devoted to 
the registers of intra-Asian connections from the perspective of different 
disciplinary foci, such as religious studies, philology, history, art history, 
and archaeology, and marrying micro- and macro-historical analysis.
Chapter 10, “Sanskritic Buddhism as an Asian Universalism” by Iain 
Sinclair explores the ways in which Sanskritic Buddhism—a nontheistic, 
nonessentialist religion of universalist orientation—marked out its own 
distinctive territory across the parts of the world now called South, Central 
and Southeast Asia. Sinclair argues that regional expressions of Sanskritic 
Buddhism are much more weakly tied to parochial institutions than other 
forms of Buddhism, which follows from the fact that  its canonical language, 
Sanskrit, is also a nonsectarian language that is standard across nation-
state boundaries and is used for purposes other than religion. As Sanskritic 
Buddhism takes part in a technical discourse ( Ğāstra ) on semisecular 
subjects such as medicine, grammar and literary composition, it tends to 
coexist and be in dialogue with Brahmanism, without being predicated 
on it, and shares in the socio-religious milieu of Hinduism. However, its 
geographic extent far exceeds that of Hinduism, covering much of the 
Sino-Tibetan world and its diaspora, while at the same time, the unitary 
transnational character of Sanskritic Buddhism has often been obscured by 
the nationalist priorities of colonial scholarship and its globalist successors. 
The chapter highlights various stratagems used to construct a Buddhist 
transsectarianism on the discursive level.
Chapter 11, “Interconnectedness and Mobility in the Middle Ages/
Nowadays: From Baghdad to Chang’an and from Istanbul to Tokyo” by 
Federica Broilo maps the active networks of circula tion and exchange during 
the middle ages, arguing that cultural systems of the Abbasid Caliphate of 
Baghdad and Tang China were not inserted in sealed boxes. Chang’an and 
Baghdad were at that time two of the biggest cities in the world, marked 
by strong rule, successful diplomatic relationships, economic expansion, 
and a cultural efÀorescence characterized by a cosmopolitan style. The 
comparative methodology of the chapter describes bo th entanglements and 
contacts among artistic and architectural practices belonging to different 
cultural systems that appear distant on the geographic chart, but are  

--- [Page 21] ---
10 Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee
actually much closer than originally thought. The adoption of models 
moving within the broad borders of Asia is relevant to our days, when 
read together with other contemporary phenomena that are now affecting 
Asia again, such as the use of distinctive architectural icons coming from a 
specific part of Asia like Turkey into newly constructed buildings in Japan. 
Broilo engages in a comparison between those phenomena searching for 
a key to read them as part of the same process of interconnectedness and 
mobility from West Asia to East Asia and back.
Chapter 12, “Connecting Networks and Orienting Space: Relocating 
Nguyen Cochinchina between East and Southeast Asia in the Sixteenth 
and Eighteenth Centuries” by Vu Duc Liem examines the geographical 
configuration of early modern Vietnam through the prism of economic 
networks and political landscapes. It argues that the Nguyen Cochinchina 
had developed a unique perspective of geographical orientation along the 
frontier between East and Southeast Asia. The Nguye ns were economically 
directed southward to their Southeast Asian neighbours, but culturally 
and politically northward to the Sino-world. Cochin china thus offers 
a fascinating example of a polity standing at the crossroad of Asian 
networks, between the two geopolitical entities that we now label as East 
and Southeast Asia. Anthony Reid recognized that Southeast Asia is a 
space of “not China, not India”, but was unable to precisely define what 
it is in the between. By following the networks and identifying the spatial 
aspects of political acclimatization, this chapter engages with the question 
of who were the agents “in the between”, and how they defined identity 
and located themselves in space.
Chapter  13, “The Highlands of West Sumatra and Their Marit ime 
Trading Connections” by Mai Lin Tjoa-Bonatz gives a first glimpse 
into the nature, role, and operations of the settle ments in Tanah 
Datar, the heartland of the Minangkabau community i n the highland 
of Western Sumatra, through a close examination of their material 
culture from the fourteenth to the seventeenth centuries. It is now 
possible to analyse different types of ceramic impo rts at these sites in 
the light of ongoing archaeological investigations,  and advance some 
interpretations in connection with other historical and archaeological data 
on commercial interactions between the highland and  maritime regions. 
The interconnection between the uplands and the lowlands ha d essential 
effects on the cultural and socio-economic conditio ns of the highlands. 
New excavation finds suggest that the hill site at B ukit Gombak represents 
the centre of King Ɩdityavarman’s polity, the last Hindu-Buddhist king 
of Indonesia in the fourteenth century.

--- [Page 22] ---
Introduction 11
In discussing the issues of (trans)locality, mobility, and imagination in 
Asian contexts through a multi-site, multi-register, multi-actor approach, 
this volume hopes to contribute to an emerging field of scholarship that has 
begun to critically examine the framework set by Area Studies scholarship 
within the field of Asian Studies. At the same time, its wide-ranging 
historical and geographical approach aims at enriching our understanding 
of “Asia” as a Àuid contact zone shaped by multidirectional circulatory 
dynamics characterized by connections and interactions.
Bibliography
Abalahin, Andrew. 2011. “ µSino-Pacifica’: Conceptualizing Greater Southeast 
Asia as a Sub-Arena of World History”.  Journal of World History  22, no. 4:  
659–91.
Acharya, Amitav. 2013. Civilizations in Embrace: The Spread of Ideas and the 
Transformation of Power: India and Southeast Asia in the Classical Age . 
Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Ali, Daud. 2009. “Connected Histories? Regional Historiography and Theories 
of Cultural Contact between Early South and Southeast Asia”. In Islamic 
Connections: Muslim Societies in South and Southeast Asia , edited by  
R. Michael Feener and Terenjit Sevea. Singapore: Institute of Southeast 
Asian Studies.
Bose, Sugata. 2006. A Hundred Horizons: Indian Ocean in the Age of Global 
Empire . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Chen, Tina. 2017. “Context, Coordinate, Circulation: The Postrepresentational 
Cartographies of Global Asias”. Verge: Studies in Global Asia  3, no. 1 
(Spring): vi–xiv.
Chaudhuri, K.N. 1985. Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: An Economic 
History from the Rise of Islam to 1750 . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
———. 1993. “The Unity and Disunity of Indian Ocean History from the Rise of 
Islam to 1750: The Outline of a Theory and Historical Discourse”. Journal 
of World History  4, no. 1: 1–21.
Chavannes, Édouard. 1903. Documents sur les Tou Kiue (turcs) occidentaux , 
Recueillis et commentés par Édouard Chavannes . St. Petersburg: 
Commissionnaires de l’Académie impériale des sciences.
Colless, Brian E. 1969. “Persian Merchants and Miss ionaries in Medieval 
Malaya”. Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society  42, 
no. 2 (216): 10–47.
Duara, Prasenjit. 2010. “Asia Redux: Conceptualizing a Region for Our Times”. 
Journal of Asian Studies  69, no. 4: 963–83.
Fairey, Jack, and Brian P. Farrell. 2018. “Series Introduction: Reordering an 

--- [Page 23] ---
12 Andrea Acri, Kashshaf Ghani, Murari K. Jha and Sraman Mukherjee
Imperial, Global, Modern Asia”. In Empire in Asia: A New Global History , 
edited by Jack Fairey and Brian P. Farrell, vol. 1. London: Bloomsbury.
Frank, Andre G. 1998. ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age . Berkeley: 
University of Calfornia Press.
Frasch, Tilman. 2017. “A Pāli cosmopolis" Sri Lanka and the Theravāda Buddhist 
ecumene, c. 500–1500”. In Sri Lanka at the Crossroads of History , edited by 
=. Biedermann and A. Strathern, pp. 66–76. London: UCL Press.
Frey, Mark, and Nicola Spakowski, eds. 2015. Asianisms, Regionalist Interactions, 
and Asian Integration . Singapore: NUS Press.
Goody, Jack. 2010. The Eurasian Miracle . Cambridge: Polity.
Guillot, Claude, Denys Lombard, and Roderick Ptak, eds. 1998. From the 
Mediterranean to the China Sea: Miscellaneous Notes . Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz.
Gupta, Sunil. 2005. “The Bay of Bengal Interaction Sphere (1000 BC–AD 500)”. 
,ndo3aci¿c 3rehistory $ssociation %ulletin 25: 21–30.
Ho, Engseng. 2006. The Graves of Tarim: Genealogy and Mobility Across the 
Indian Ocean . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Holmes, Catherine, and Naomi Standen, eds. 2018. “Introduction: Towards a 
Global Middle Ages”. Special Issue “The Global Middle Ages”, Past & 
Present  238, Issue Supplement no. 13: 1–44.
Jaspers, Karl. 1953. “The Axial Period”. In The Origin and Goal of History , by 
Karl Jaspers, pp. 1–25. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kulke, Hermann. 1990. “Indian Colonies, Indianization or Cultural Convergence? 
ReÀections on the Changing Image of India’s Role in South East Asia”. In 
Onderzoek in Zuidoost-Azie. Agenda’ s voor de jaren negentig , edited by Henk 
Schulte-Nordholt. Leiden: Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden.
———. 2014. “The Concept of Cultural Convergence Revisited. ReÀections on 
India’s Early InÀuence in Southeast Asia”. In Asian Encounters; Exploring 
Connected Histories , edited by Parul Pandya Dhar and Upinder Singh, 
pp. 3–19. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, Martin W., and Kären Wigen. 1997. The Myth of Continents: A Critique 
of Metageography . London and Los Angeles: University of California  
Press.
Lieberman, Victor. 2003. Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in Global Context, 
c. 800–1830. Volume 1: Integration of the Mainland . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
———. 2009. Strange Parallels: Southeast Asia in Global Context, c. 800–1830 . 
V ol. 2,  Mainland Mirrors: Europe, Japan, China, South Asia, and the Islands . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lombard, Denys. 1995. “Networks and Synchronisms in  Southeast Asian History”. 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies  26, no. 1: 10–16.
Matisoff, James A. 1991. “Sino-Tibetan Linguistics: Present State and Future 
Prospects”. Annual Review of Anthropology  20: 485–86. 

--- [Page 24] ---
Introduction 13
McNeill, William H. 1963. The Rise of the West . Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Milner, Anthony, and Deborah Johnson. 1997. “The Idea of Asia”. In Regionalism, 
Subregionalism and APEC , edited by John Ingelson, pp. 1–20. Melbourne: 
Monash Asia Institute.
Mus, Paul. 1933. “Cultes indiens et indigènes au Champa”. Bulletin de l’École 
française d’Extrême-Orient  33: 367–410.
Noor, Farish A. 2016. The Discursive Construction of Southeast Asia in 19th-
Century Colonial-Capitalist Discourse . Amsterdam: Amsterdam University 
Press.
Pearson, Michael. 2003. The Indian Ocean . London: Routledge.
Pollock, Sheldon. 2006. The Language of the Gods in the World of Men: Sanskrit, 
Culture, and Power in Premodern India . Berkeley: University of California 
Press.
V on Richthofen, Ferdinand. 1877. “Über die zentralasiatischen Seidenstrassen 
bis zum 2. Jh. n. Chr.”. Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu 
Berlin 1877 : 96–122.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The ĝaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of ĝaivism 
during the Early Medieval Period”. In Genesis and Development of Tantrism , 
edited by S. Einoo. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.
van Schendel, Willem. 2002. “Geographies of Knowing , Geographies of Ignorance: 
Jumping Scale in Southeast Asia”. Environment and Planning D: Society 
and Space  20: 647–68.
Singh, Upinder and Parul Pandya Dhar, eds. 2014. Asian Encounters: Exploring 
Connected Histories . New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Strathern, Alan. 2018. “Global Early Modernity and the Problem of What Came 
Before”. Past & Present  238, Issue Supplement no. 13: 317–44.
Subrahmanyam, Sanjay. 1997. “Connected Histories: N otes towards a 
Reconfiguration of Early Modern Eurasia”. In “The Eurasian Context of the 
Early Modern History of Mainland South East Asia, 1400–1800”.  Special 
Issue,  Modern Asian Studies  31, no. 3: 735–62.
———. 2016. “One Asia, or Many" ReÀections from Connected Histo ry”. Modern 
Asian Studies  50, no. 1: 5–43.
White, David G. 2012. “Netra Tantra at the Crossroads of the Demonological 
Cosmopolis”. Journal of Hindu Studies 5: 145–71.