--- [Page 1] ---
281 The Journal of Burma Studies  Vol. 19 No. 2 (2015), pp. 281–340 © 2015 Center for Burma Studies
Northern Illinois University
281 Three More Sanskrit 
Inscriptions of Arakan: 
New Perspectives on Its Name, 
Dynastic History, and 
Buddhist Culture in the First 
Millennium
Arlo Grifﬁ  ths
École française d’Extrême-Orient
Fondly dedicated to the memory of Pam Gutman,
who drew me to the study of these inscriptions and
donated her collection of estampages to the EFEO
In his article “Some Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan,” pub-
lished posthumously in 1944, the British Sanskrit scholar E.H. 
Johnston was the ﬁ rst to bring to the a tt ention of the scholarly 
world the existence of a substantial epigraphic tradition in 
Sanskrit language on Burmese soil. While other parts of 
Burma have never yielded even a handful of inscriptions in 
Sanskrit,1 signiﬁ cant further ﬁ nds of Sanskrit epigraphic 
1 I am so far aware of just four inscriptions wholly or partly composed 
in Sanskrit found in other parts of Burma: [1] the bilingual Sanskrit-Pyu 
inscription engraved on the base of a stone Buddha sculpture at the 
Śrīkṣetra Museum (Luce 1985/I: p. 65 with n. 22, p. 132; II: plates 16–7); [2] 
the fragments of a monolingual Sanskrit inscription said to have been 
found at Śrīkṣetra but of which no trace is to be found there nowadays (see 
Sircar 1976: 210–7, Gutman 2001: 109 n. 1; another fragment whose discov-
ery was mentioned in the report of the Archaeological Survey of Burma 

--- [Page 2] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 282
material in Arakan have continued to be made over the 
decades after Johnston’s seminal study, gradually rev ealing 
more of the depth and breadth of this tradition. Some of these 
new ﬁ nds have been published in the reports of the Archae-
ological Survey of Burma (1959, 1960, 1964, 1965), by the 
Arakanese scholar San Tha Aung (1974) and by the renowned 
Indian epigraphist D.C. Sircar (1957–58, 1967, 1976). Since 
then, no major publications have followed except a paper by 
Kyaw Minn Htin (2011), which focuses on a single type of 
inscription, namely the rather numerous short inscriptions 
comprising citation of the ye dharm āḥ formula alone, or accom-
panied by short dedicatory statements, often in very garbled 
language.
The Arakan tradition of Sanskrit epigraphy is limited 
chronologically to roughly the second half of the ﬁ rst millen-
nium ce, and forms only the ﬁ rst chapter of the epigraphical 
history of Arakan.2 After a gap of several centuries without 
any local epigraphical production, an Arakanese vernacular 
tradition starts in about the fourteenth century and forms the 
second chapter of this history. An overall survey of the epi-
graphical “archive” of Arakan has been wri tt en by Kyaw 
Minn Htin and Jacques Leider (forthcoming), and these same 
scholars have compiled an inventory of the entire corpus of 
Arakan epigraphy, in which each inscription has received an 
“ A.” number.3 The Sanskrit inscriptions among them are 
for 1960, p. 22 with ﬁ g. 13, may well belong to this same inscription); [3] a 
ruined inscription held in a small shed near the Tharaba gate at Pagan 
brought to my a tt ention by Tilman Frasch, who kindly shared photos of 
an estampage revealing an almost entirely illegible inscription in a form of 
script called Gau ḍī that was current in eleventh-/twelfth-century Bengal; 
[4] the recently discovered Saw Lu inscription in Myi tt ha, which at the top 
of the side also bearing Pali and Pyu texts reveals the extremely damaged 
remains of a Sanskrit one as well, again in such a Northeast Indian script.
2 The Pali and Pyu languages, each in its speci ﬁ c script (but see n77), 
play a marginal role in this chapter.
3 The a tt ribution of such le tt er-coded numbers follows the well-estab-
lished model of epigraphical inventories initiated and still maintained 
by the EFEO for the inscriptions of Cambodia (K.) and Camp ā (C.). See 
Gerschheimer 2003–04 and Gri ﬃ  ths et al. 2008–09.

--- [Page 3] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 283
shown here on a few maps ( ﬁ gs. 1–3), which reveal that the 
vast majority of the relevant items have been found on the 
left bank of the Kaladan River, notably around the major 
early urban site of Ves ālī. The total number of Sanskrit inscrip-
tions so far recorded for the ﬁ rst millennium is about two 
dozen; among these less than a dozen constitute substantial 
(non-formulaic) texts. Scholarship so far has assumed the 
bulk of this small corpus to date to the sixth through eighth 
centuries, with outliers as early as the third century and as 
late as the eleventh century ce.
While a comprehensive publication and historical evalua-
tion of the Arakan Sanskrit corpus is a long-term aim which 
the present author initially undertook in collaboration with 
the late P. Gutman4 and is now pursuing on his own, the 
more modest aim of the present paper is to provide editions 
of three Sanskrit inscriptions so far unpublished,5 in order to 
illustrate some of the signi ﬁ cance of this material to the 
history of Arakan while simultaneously emphasizing the 
numerous challenges inherent in doing historical and philo-
logical justice to the Arakan Sanskrit corpus.
These challenges are formidable. One of the fundamental 
problems is the relatively very bad state of physical preserva-
tion of the inscriptions. With the exception of some ye dharm āḥ 
inscriptions, not a single epigraph has survived intact. 
4 This scholar was consistently involved in the study of ancient Arakan 
since the 1970s. After her doctoral thesis, mentioned in the next footnote, 
she produced several research papers and a book dealing with various 
aspects of the history of this part of Burma. See the remembrance and list 
of publications included in this issue of the Journal of Burma Studies .
5 To be precise, an edition with translation of the third (A. 60) was 
already included in P. Gutman’s doctoral thesis (1976), which is conve-
niently accessible online at h tt p://hdl.handle.net/1885/47122. But consider-
ing that this work does not constitute a formal publication while the 
inscription in question is a well-preserved specimen and moreover of sig-
niﬁ cance for the history of religion, it seemed worthwhile to include it here. 
Transliterations of uneven quality (without translation) of all three of the 
inscriptions to be published here were included in the more recent doctoral 
thesis of U Sandamuni Bhikkhu (2003).

--- [Page 4] ---


--- [Page 5] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 285
This means that all of the larger inscriptions, which in their 
original state would hav e comprised text of potential value 
for diverse forms of historical enquiry, come to us only in 
amputated state and, what is worse, are still often hard to 
decipher even in those parts not lost entirely. Indeed, in my 
experience working on inscriptions of South and Southeast 
Asia, I have not come across any other area where the ravages 
of time have dealt such crushing blows to the epigraphical 
record as is the case with ﬁ rst-millennium Arakan. For pur-
poses of historical research, this basic problem is compounded 
by a total absence of absolute dates, partly due to physical 
damage su ﬀ ered by the preserved inscriptions (see item A. 2 
below), but no doubt also because this epigraphic tradition 
rarely recorded dates in any way to begin with, and when it 
did, preferred indicating regnal years (as in A. 1 below) rather 
than absolute dates.
The absence of absolute dates is far from unique if 
we look at other South and Southeast Asian epigraphical 
Figures 1–3  Maps by Bob Hudson showing the distribution of Sanskrit 
inscriptions in Arakan.

--- [Page 6] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 286
traditions, and is characteristic among others for the epi-
graphic traditions of greater Bengal in the post-Gupta period.6 
It is indisputably with the ﬁ rst-millennium Bengal tradition 
that the neighboring tradition of Arakan shares the greatest 
number of features, such as language of epigraphic expres-
sion (Sanskrit), types of script used to represent this language 
(from late forms of Northern Br āhmī to Siddham ātr̥kā), the 
general structure of the texts, and the mentioned absence of 
absolute dates. It is therefore to Bengal that we must look in 
the ﬁ rst instance to seek comparisons that might help to solve 
some of the problems we face in studying the Arakan corpus, 
especially to a tt empt relative dating of the inscriptions based 
on palaeographic comparison. But here we hit on further 
problems. Firstly, because next to many similarities, there is 
also an important di ﬀ erence between early Bengal epigraphy 
and our material: Bengal inscriptions are almost without 
exception engraved on metal supports, especially copper-
plates, while Arakan inscriptions are, with few exceptions, 
engraved on stone. This reduces the feasibility of reliable pal-
aeographic comparison. To make things worse, the absence of 
absolute dates on the Bengal side, after the Gupta period, 
means that we remain in doubt as to the dates of the most 
relevant early Bengal inscriptions. As long as the chronologi-
cal framework is not much clearer there than it is on the 
Arakan side, even a very striking palaeographic agreement 
will generally not yield a solid chronological argument. I will 
return at the end of this article to the problem of dating. For 
now, it will su ﬃ  ce to note that the epigraphic material to be 
discussed can safely be assumed to fall within the very broad 
dating bracket of 500–900 ce.
Philological Procedure
I will now ﬁ rst proceed to present the three selected 
new inscriptions one by one. A brief introduction will 
6 See Morrison 1970.

--- [Page 7] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 287
furnish for each item information about its provenance, 
present whereabouts, dimensions, and reproductions av ail-
able for it.
In my editions, line numbers are indicated in parentheses 
and marked o ﬀ  from the text proper by use of bold typeface. 
When this yields a more e ﬀ ective presentation, prose parts 
of the inscriptions are run together into single paragraphs; 
verses are always indicated as such by a special layout and 
indication of the verse-type in square brackets. Since neither 
of the two inscriptions containing verses are legible or even 
preserved at all for their top parts, the total number of verses 
cannot be determined and hence verses remain unnumbered 
throughout. Observations on my readings and on necessary 
emendations are presented in footnotes. Slight deviations 
from the norm of Sanskrit orthography, of the type com-
monly found in manuscripts and inscriptions, are generally 
not indicated.
The following further editorial signs are used:
(...) graphic elements whose reading is visually uncertain 
but philologically probable, or vice versa
[...] graphic elements wholly lost or wholly unreadable on 
the stone but restorable on the basis of philological con-
siderations
/// textual loss at the left or right edge of the stone
⨆ one totally illegible or lost ak ṣara; if verse-context is 
clear, this sign is replaced by indications of the expected 
prosodic value of the lost ak ṣara (⏑, –, ⏓ indicating that 
one metrically short, long, or indi ﬀ erent syllable must 
have been present)
C one unreadable consonant element of an ak ṣara
V one unreadable vowel element of an ak ṣara
°V an ak ṣara vowel of the type V
· the virāma sign
* a consonant stripped of its inherent vowel by other 
or further means than the sole vir āma sign (e.g. 
by reducing of the size of the ak ṣara or otherwise 

--- [Page 8] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 288
diﬀ erentiating its shape from the normal ak ṣara with 
inherent vowel)
A literal translation follows immediately after the edi-
tion of each inscription. Some comments on contents will 
be provided in footnotes, while discussion of major his-
torical issues is reserved for a separate section of this 
article.
Stone of Odein (A. 1)
Currently held in the Mrauk U Museum, Rakhine State, 
under nr. 48, this stone was found by Kyaw Htun Aung on 
December 2, 1986 in the water tank of the monastery of 
Odein <aui ḥ thin ḥ> village (Rakhine State, Si tt we Division, 
Mrauk U Township), about a half mile from the southern head 
of the Lan Mwee Taung <la ṅḥ mvī toṅ> hills, on the bank of 
the Rann Chaung <ram ḥ khyo ṅḥ> river. There are lots of pot-
sherds on the ground all around the site of discovery. The 
meaning of the village’s name is appropriately “[village] of 
pott ers.” It lies opposite the village Prine Cha, where inscrip-
tion A. 2 was found (see below). Carved in sandstone, showing 
some decoration, the shape of this stone (71.5 × 33 × 15.5 cm) 
suggests that it was once part of some structure, but it is dif-
ﬁ cult to determine what its architectural function would 
have been. A small portion at the right margin of the text is 
more deeply cut, at the height of lines 1–11, and in the poor 
state of preservation of these lines it is indeterminable if 
this irregularity in the shape of the stone predates or postdates 
the engraving of the text. No more than sca tt ered words or 
akṣaras can be recovered with any degree of certainty for these 
lines.
At its library in Paris, the EFEO holds for this inscription 
an estampage numbered n. 2152 which, together with other 
estampages held by the EFEO in Chiang Mai and photos 
taken by Arlo Gri ﬃ  ths, has served as the basis for the edition 
proposed here. See ﬁ gs. 4 and 5.

--- [Page 9] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 289
Figure 4  The Odein inscription A. 1 (right) and the Prine Cha inscrip-
tion A. 2 (left). Photo Arlo Gri ﬃ  ths.
Text
(1) ⨆ ///7 ⨆ (sustha) ⨆ (ja) ⨆ t[r]ibhuvan ādhīśās t(r)ya-
(2) dhva ⨆ susmita śo ⨆ (pī)tāḥ pi(tar) āpada ⨆ nā ⨆
(3) ⨆⨆ ta(tpr ā)mvata ⨆ pV ⨆⨆ vāḥ || ⨆ (līlā)maga( ṁ) 
⨆⨆
(4) ⨆ tri ⨆ (yat) āsukhavat ī ⨆ rapura ⨆ Cārādraśu ⨆⨆
(5) ⨆⨆⨆  sa ⨆ tāṁ(sva)C āraṁ gata ṁ ⨆⨆⨆⨆  ti ⨆ ḥ ⨆ s(o)-
ḍaśa
(6) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆  bhav ad(v)i( ṅ)maṇḍa(l)odg āmita ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆
(7) ⨆⨆⨆  dharmaCiC ā (śr)īkāmara ṅgeśvara ḥ (ya) ⨆⨆⨆  
(pra)
(8) ⨆⨆⨆  pajitari (dharmmo) lavdha ḥ pitā ⨆⨆⨆  pra(th)ita 
⨆
7 Perhaps there is no loss of any ak ṣaras at the beginning of this line, and 
we have rather an elongated form of the siddham  sign: , right after the 
estampage starts to show a black background.

--- [Page 10] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 290
Figure 5  The Odein inscription A. 1. EFEO estampage n. 2152.

--- [Page 11] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 291
(9) (tapa ḥ) śrīdharmmade(va)jayo jagad ārtt ihārī Cy ā 
⨆⨆⨆
(10) ṇya ⨆ bhiCed ī tamo bhi ⨆⨆ yaḥ puṇyāsāditala ⨆⨆
(11) mah īdhara °iva (p ūmoty ā) śrīmaty eva ⨆⨆ (dharmma)
ji ⨆⨆
(12) (vyogu) ṇā nara ḥ
[Anu ṣṭubh]
t(e)jasv ī matim( āñ) ch ūrakr̥taj(ñ)o ⏓ ⏑ Ci – ⏓
(13) (rū)payovanasampanno devar āja °iv āpara ḥ ||
[Anu ṣṭubh]
pa(rama)[so] (14)gato8 (dh) īmān aṇḍajān(v)ayasambhava ḥ
mātāpitro ḥ sa ⏓ ⏓ ⏓ (15) pādānudhy ātatatpara ḥ ||9
tena (rudr) ānvayavija(tp/kp)raroditapara(me (16)śvarā)-pa-
ra mabha ṭṭ(ā)rakamah ārājādhir ājaśrīdharmmavijaya (17)de-
vena10 prājya(r) ājyodayadvit īyasamva tsara(cavaha) ⨆⨆(18)sa -
mvandhacampar āmavih ārāryyabhik ṣusaṁghaparibhog ā-
8 pa(rama)[so]gato : since the inscription elsewhere spells o for au, I restore 
here the spelling sogato , to be read as saugato .
9 pādānudhy āta°: in view of the ensuing element ° tatpara ḥ, this should 
perhaps be emended to pādānudhy ānatatpara ḥ. Cf. the copper-plate of 
Kāntideva of Harikel ā (Majumdar 1941–42), ll. 14–15: paramasaugato 
mātāpitr̥pādānudhy ātaḥ, while Ferrier & Törzsök (2008: 95, 109n94) adduce 
an example of the expression pādānudhy ānarata , with rata near synonymous 
to tatpara .
10 ° vija(tp/kp)prarodita °: if the reading is correct, then it seems that it must 
be emended to ° viṣvakprarodita ° or ° vidvatprarodita °. Although the la tt er is 
arguably an easier emendation, the former is adopted here because it gives 
a bett er sense and moreover it seems a bit more likely that the problematic 
ligature starts with k than with t.—para(me śvarā)°: I cannot entirely exclude 
that the scribe actually wrote ° parame śvaro, although the e-mātrā is consis-
tently placed above the ak ṣara elsewhere in this inscription and to read ro 
I would have to assume rare use of the e-mātrā suspended to the left of the 
akṣara; space does seem su ﬃ  cient to assume so, and use of the declined 
form in - ro was no doubt familiar to our author (cf. the copper-plate 
of K āntideva, l. 15: parame śvaro mah ārājādhir ājaḥ). But I prefer to read 
°parame śvarā° which must be emended to ° parame śvara°. In the P āla corpus, 
parame śvaraparamabha ṭṭārakamah ārājādhir āja is a set phrase.

--- [Page 12] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 292
11 °( cavaha )°: the meaning is unclear and the reading uncertain. The sign 
here tentatively read as ca does not seem identical in shape to the ca akṣaras 
elsewhere in the inscription. None of the alternatives (° e with head mark, 
a truncated ka) seems more convincing.—° campar āma°: correct ° camp ārāma.
12 h(ā)rag(a ṁ): If the reading is correct, then it seems this must be emended 
to vihāragaṁ.
13 satr̥la°: correct satr̥ṇa°. Cf. the ﬁ xed expression svasīmātr̥ṇayūtigocaraparya-
ntaḥ in the P āla corpus. In the Munger copper-plate of Devap āla (Barne tt  
1925–26), ll. 38–39, we read more explicitly svasīmātr̥ṇayūtigocaraparyanta ḥ 
satala ḥ sodde śaḥ [...] satr̥ṇaḥ... .
14 datt a: correct datt am· or datt aṁ.
15 mātāpitr̥i°: the redundant spelling combining i-vocalisation with 
r̥-vocalisation is not unknown elsewhere. For another early Southeast 
Asian example, see raktamr̥itt ika° in the inscription of Mah ānāvika Bud-
dhagupta (Chhabra 1965: 22–6, esp. p. 22n3).
16 sat(v) ārāśer anurajñan ādāptaye: correct  satt varāśer anu tt arajñ ānāvāptaye . 
Cf. n23 below.
17 vasundhar ā: correct vasundhar āṁ.
18 °iti ḥ: the visarga here functions as punctuation sign (cf. Kudo 2004). 
See discussion of the shape of °i below, under Palaeographic Comparison 
of the New Inscriptions.
19 This verse lists a number of standard characteristics of the ideal Indian 
king. Cf. Mah ābhārata 12.84.014 kulīnaḥ satyasa ṁpannas titik ṣur dak ṣa ātmav ān | 
śūraḥ kr̥tajña ḥ saty aś ca śreyasa ḥ pārtha lak ṣaṇam | |; Pañcatantra  2.126 
utsāhasampannam ad īrghas ūtraṁ kriy āvidhijña ṁ vyasane ṣv asaktam | śūraṁ 
kr̥tajña ṁ dr̥ḍhasauhr̥daṁ ca lak ṣmīḥ svaya ṁ vāñchati v āsaheto ḥ || .ya11 (19) h(ā)rag(a ṁ)12 satr̥lakṣett rañ13 catuss īmāparyyantan 
datt a14 ||  m ātāpi(20)tr̥ipūrvva ṁgama ṁ15 kr̥tv(ā) sakalasya ca 
sat(v) ārāśer anurajñan ādāptaye16
[Anu ṣṭubh]
(21) svada tt ām parada tt ām vā yo hareta vasundhar ā17
sa vi ṣṭhāyāṁ kr̥mi(22)r bhūtvā pitr̥bhis saha pacyata °iti ḥ18 ||
Translation
(1–12) [too ruined to recover any coherent text]
(12) Having splendor, endowed with intelligence, a hero, 
grateful ... ; endowed with beauty and youthfulness, like 
a second king of the gods (Indra).19

--- [Page 13] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 293
20 See my comments below on this and other lineages mentioned in the 
Arakan corpus.
21 The use of the expression pādānudhy āta is problematic here due to the 
combination with tatpara ḥ, and the problem can be resolved with the emen-
dation proposed in n9. By translating this occurrence as “meditating on the 
feet,” I go against the conclusions of Ferrier and Törzsök (2008) who admit 
this interpretation only for post-tenth-century documents. As we will see 
below, this inscription probably dates to the sixth or seventh century. The 
lacuna, however, makes it impossible to rule out with certainty that the 
author here intended “blessed by the feet of his parents and zealous in ...”.
22 In my interpretation, the compound ending in prarodita  is of the 
inverted bahuvr īhi type (Wackernagel & Debrunner 1957: §116a). Our 
author is clearly playing on the other meaning of parame śvara, namely as a 
name of Śiva.
23 This sentence represents in truncated form the “common Mah āyāna 
formula” (Johnston 1944: 366, Schopen 1979) that is a tt ested fully in an 
inscription engraved in the same type of script on a bell from Pyedaung 
monastery (A. 203): (1) deyadharmmo ya ṁ śākyabhik ṣor bh ū⨆teḥ ya catra 
puṇyaṁ tad bhavatu m ātāpitr̥(p)ū[rvva] ṅgama ṁ kr̥tvā (2)cāryyop ādhyāyānāṁ 
sarvvasatv ānāñ ca °anu tt arajñ ānāvāptaye °iti  | | (cited in my own reading, 
somewhat improv ed vis-à-vis that published by Johnston 1944: 382).
24 Lines 21–2 contain a standard admonitory formula a tt ested widely 
in Indian epigraphy. See Sircar 1965: 196 nr. 132 for very extensive 
references.(13–15) Devout Buddhist, wise, born in the Bird-lineage,20 
eagerly engaged in meditating on the feet21 of his mother 
and father ...
(15–19) By him, the overlord of great kings Śrī Dharmavi-
jayadeva, paramount sovereign, paramount lord ( para-
meśvara) who has given cause for crying throughout 
the Rudra-lineage,22 on the occasion of cavahaXX  (?) in 
the second year of the rise of his bountiful reign, gave the 
land with the produce inside the monastery, up to the 
four boundaries, for the maintenance of the noble monks 
of the Camp ārāma monastery.
(19–20) [He did this] for the a tt ainment of supreme know-
ledge by the entire host of beings, beginning with his 
parents.23
(21–22) He who would rob land, whether given by himself or 
by another, is reborn as a worm in excrement and is 
cooked (in the pits of hell) together with his ancestors.24

--- [Page 14] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 294
Stela of Prine Cha Hill (A. 2)
Currently held at the State Archaeological Museum, Mrauk 
U, Rakhine State, under nr. 39, this stone was found on 
December 1, 1980 by Kyaw Htun Aung beside a hill outside 
of Prine Cha <prui ṅḥ khya> village (Rakhine State, Si tt we 
Division, Mrauk U Township), on the bank of the Rann 
Khyaung <ram ḥ khyo ṅ>. This village lies opposite the village 
Odein, where inscription A. 1 was found (see above). There 
are clear traces (in the form of piles of brick) of the former 
presence of a structure (presumably a stūpa) atop this hill. 
The shape of the stela (80 × 45 × 12 cm), carved in sandstone, 
suggests that it was intended to stand freely against a wall. 
A signiﬁ cant, roughly triangular, portion of the top left is lost, 
causing the loss of many ak ṣaras at the start of lines 1–13.
At its library in Paris, the EFEO holds for this inscription 
estampages numbered n. 2154, 2155 and 2156. Together with 
other estampages held by the EFEO in Chiang Mai and photos 
taken by Christian Lammerts, these have served as the basis 
for the edition proposed here (see ﬁ gs. 4 and 6).
Text
(1) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ ///pūjitaṁ dayāpadāṁ jaga(d)-
upade( ś)⨆⨆ṇam(ya) 25
(2) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ ///sya p ādāmvujanirmmala ṁhi-
nā26 paramasogato
(3) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ ///(cū)ḍāmaṇimah ārājādhir ājaśrī-
mān dharmm ā-27
25 °upade( ś)⨆⨆ṇam(ya) : restore ° upade śakaṁ praṇamya ? Only the faintest 
trace of some conjunct consonant is visible after m.
26 ° nirmmala ṁhinā: the reading seems secure but does not make sense; 
emend ° nity ālaṁbhin ā?
27 dharmm ā-: the long ﬁ nal ā is unmistakable. Therefore, none of the 
names dharmmacandra , dharmmavijaya , and dharmma śūra mentioned in the 
Shitt aung Pagoda pillar inscr. (A. 71), st. XXXIV, XXXIX, XLII, come into 
question for ﬁ lling in part of the lacuna at the start of l. 4. The only suitable 
name known to me from a possibly relevant historical context is that 
of Dharm ākara, a ruler of some indeterminate territory in what is now  
Southeast Bengal and/or possibly also Arakan known from a small number 
of coins (Kathotia 2006: 61, 62, 69–70).

--- [Page 15] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 295
Figure 6  The Prine Cha inscription A. 2. EFEO estampage n. 2154.
(4) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ ///śūra⨆mā⨆⨆(royir tt a)dgr āme28 vi-
hāra29 (kāri)taṁ
(5) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ /// °āṣāḍham āse śuklapak ṣapratipadi 
nakṣatrapraj āpati
(6) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ /// °am( r̥)tayogasam āyukta ṁ | den ūś30 
ca nandin ī nāma v āṇija⨆⨆
28 śūra⨆mā⨆⨆(royir tt a)dgr āme: three ak ṣaras are entirely unreadable, but 
the ﬁ rst can probably be restored as kṣa based on the occurrence of what 
appears to be the same name in l. 14, there too alas illegible for the two 
akṣaras after mā. My reading of the ak ṣaras preceding dgrāme does not yield 
a clear sense and is for this reason proposed only very tentatively.
29 vihāra: understand vihāraṁ, unless one ought to read vihāre.
30 denūś: correct dhenu ś (or dhen ūś).

--- [Page 16] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 296
31 (pudgaha)sya : if the reading is correct, then this sequence must probably 
be emended to pudgalasya .
32 As few of the preceding segments on this line yield a clear sense, it is 
hard to distinguish between ak ṣaras whose reading is secure from those 
which are uncertain.
33 °i(ḍ)yate : if the reading is correct, then it seems necessary to correct 
īḍyate, although the meaning is somewhat problematic.
34 (dh)o(ti)ka °: the reading is extremely uncertain. D. Acharya suggests as 
possible alternative po(ñca)ka °; reading poñcika ° also seems possible. Neither 
of these alternatives is a known word, but one can imagine a connection 
with the base puñch/poñch  “to clean (shoes)” a tt ested in Buddhist Hybrid 
Sanskrit (Edgerton 1953, Dictionary, pp. 346, 354).
35 dāsa-m-eka : for dāsa eka ḥ. Here and several times below, I interpret - m- 
as standing in the function of hiatus bridger.
36 kāṣṭhāpha(la) °: the apparent circular sign resembling an anusv āra on 
top of the ﬁ rst syllable is perhaps placed too far to the left to really be 
one, and I consider it more likely to be an accidental irregularity on the 
stone. We should probably understand something like kāṣṭhaphalaka  
“plank of wood.”
37 ° eka | v āsikā°: the prima facie  reading is with long ā sign instead of a 
daṇḍa, hence ° ekav āsikā°. But the context suggests we have here a word 
derived from vāsi. See my note to the translation.
38 eka | | : space is intentionally left blank between the two da ṇḍas.
39 kaṭ(ṭ)ā(r)ik ā: the reading is uncertain, but the word kaṭṭārikā occurs in 
the new inscription of V ainyagupta (Furui, forthcoming), l. 46.
40 viśati ... vi śati ... tri śati: correct viṁśati ... vi ṁśati ... triṁśati.(7) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ ///(pudgaha)sya31 (sa)dulavodapar āṇi32 | 
°i(ḍ)yate33 vihārasya (pra)ti ⨆
(8) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ ///(guru)v andhadravya d ātavyam* | (dh)o-
(ti)katraya ṁ34 | dāsa-m-eka35 | mahi ṣadvaya ṁ
(9) ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆ ///radvaya ṁ | kāṁsabh ājanam eka ṁ | °udaka-
bhājanam eka ṁ | śākabh ājanatraya ṁ
(10) ⨆⨆⨆⨆ ///(pa)ñjik ā pañca | k āṣṭhāpha(la)niktradh āra-
m-eka36 | vāsikā-m-eka37 | |38 kaṭ(ṭ)ā(r)ik ā(-m-ek ā |)39 
⨆
(11) ⨆⨆⨆ /// pañca | chedanik āni pañca | vastras ūcikāni 
pañca | vit ānam eka | vi(t āna) ⨆⨆
(12) ⨆⨆/// p(r)alamva vi śati | dhvaja vi śati | vastrakha ṇḍa-
p(r)a[la]mva tri śati40 | deva(ghara)  ⨆⨆⨆

--- [Page 17] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 297
(13) ⨆/// (p ā)nanauk ām eka ṁ | nāvakā(chā)danik ā dvaya | 
°ubhayach ādanik ā dvaya ⨆⨆⨆⨆ ya
(14) (pal āyena) m āsikādvayam* | r ājñaḥ sa je ṣṭhabhr ātā41 
śr(ī)rāmaśūra(kṣa)mā⨆⨆vihā-
(15) rasya °etad(gr āma)va ndhadravy ānāṁ dāpayati | (y ā)-
vac candras ūryya[nak ṣa]tragraha[t ā]rakāni ti-
(16) ṣṭha(nti) | t ā(vad a) ⨆ ta ⨆ tac (c)a dharmmasa ṁ(sthāpa) 
⨆⨆⨆  śivam* | (°ida) ṁ vihāraṁ sakalasarva-
(17) [sa]tv ā ⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆⨆  nā ⨆⨆⨆  śāśā ⨆⨆⨆  kr̥tvā (cavati)
(18) (va)[pa]rih āraṁ ⨆ bhip ālitañ ca ⨆⨆ sau ⨆⨆ nila 
⨆⨆⨆⨆  la ⨆ ñcitañj ā ⨆⨆
(19) narajapret āmara °ap āyaṁ pady ateti42 || śrīḥ || śrīḥ
Translation
(1–4) Having bowed down ( praṇamya ) to the one who is 
praised ... , the teacher of the world which is in pitiful 
distress (?), ... , immaculate like lotus feet of ... , the 
devout follower of the Buddha, the illustrious great 
overlord of kings, crest jewel of ... , Dharm ā... .
(4–7) In the village ... ŚrīrāmaśūrakṣamāXX ... , a monastery 
was ordered to be built, ... in the month of ... , on the 
ﬁ rst day of the waxing fortnight, under lunar mansion 
Prajāpati43 ... , under the conjunction Am r̥ta, ... And a 
milk-cow called Nandin ī ... merchant ...44
(7–14) Is praised (?)45 what bound goods (?, bandhadravya ) are 
to be given ... to the monastery: three dhoti s (?); one slave; 
two bu ﬀ aloes; pair of ... ; one copper pla tt er; one water 
41 jeṣṭha°: correct jyeṣṭha°.
42 padyateti : double sandhi for padyata iti .
43 Praj āpati is not properly the name of any nakṣatra, but is the presiding 
deity of the nakṣatra Rohi ṇī (see Renou and Filliozat 1947–53/II: 729).
44 Or: “ And the merchant[’s ...] called Nandin ī ... the cows ...”.
45 The text seems to read ° idyate  which, if correctly read, can hardly stand 
for any other verb form than īḍyate. None of the meanings recorded for the 
verb īḍ (“to praise, to ask”) seems to ﬁ t the context. No other solution has 
occurred to me than to speculate that the verb might here mean something 
like “to list.”

--- [Page 18] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 298
pot; three vegetable pla tt ers; ﬁ ve ... ; one stand for a 
wooden washboard (?);46 one adze;47 one cu tt er; ﬁ ve 
blades; ﬁ ve needles for cloth; one canopy; twenty gar-
lands (?, pralamba ) ... for the monastery; twenty banners; 
thirty garlands (?) of portions of cloth; ... ; ... one boat (?, 
nauk ā); two covers for boatmen (?, nāvaka = n āvika); two 
double covers; two ... māsika...
(14–15) That elder brother of the king will give to the Śr(ī)-
rāmaśūra(kṣa)māXX-monastery the bound goods (?) of 
that village.
(15–16) As long as the moon, sun, lunar mansions, planets 
and starts abide, so long ... [will last] that ﬁ ne (?, śiva) 
foundation (?) for the dharma .
(16–17) ...
(18–19) immunity ... being protected ... ; ... , destruction befalls 
man, ghost, and god.
Stone Slab from V es ālī (A. 60)
Currently held in a cabinet in the bronze room at the State 
Archaeological Museum, Mrauk U, Rakhine State, under nr. 
393, this stone was found before 1969 “near the south-west 
Veśālī moat” (Gutman 1976: 99). It represents only a fragment 
(23 × 18 cm) of the original, which would have been taller, an 
indeterminate number of lines having been lost.
At its library in Paris, the EFEO holds for this inscription 
the estampage numbered n. 2172. Together with my photos 
46 This translation assumes the emendation kāṣṭhaphalakaniktradh āra. I 
owe the interpretation given here to the anonymous reviewer for the 
Journal of Burma Studies , who explains niktra  as derived from the root nij 
“to wash,” and proposes that the entire expression corresponds to Pali 
cīvara-dhovana-phalakaka  at Samantap āsādikā 1244.4 on Vinayapi ṭaka, Culla-
vagga  170.26–35 (references after the Pali Text Society editions).
47 Because it is di ﬃ  cult to see any connection with the technical term 
āvāsika, denoting a monk in permanent residence of a monastery (Silk 2008: 
150–1), I prefer reading a da ṇḍa before vāsikā-m-eka , and propose to inter-
pret vāsikā as synonym of vāsi, which occurs in a similar context in the new 
inscription of Vainyagupta (Furui, forthc.), l. 45. See for further details my 
commentary below.

--- [Page 19] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 299
taken in 2012, this has served as the basis for the edition pro-
posed here, di ﬀ ering only slightly from the one included in 
Gutman 1976. Since the bo tt om of the inscription is preserved 
while the top is lost, line numbering is here arranged in 
negative order counting upwards (see ﬁ gs. 7 and 8).
Text
(-11) /// ⨆ prāpnu-
(-10)  [va]ntv am r̥tapadam· | |
Figure 7  The Ves ālī inscription A. 60. Photo Arlo Gri ﬃ  ths.

--- [Page 20] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 300
Figure 8  The Ves ālī inscription A. 60. EFEO estampage n. 2172.

--- [Page 21] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 301
48 ° prah īnāḥ: in chaste Sanskrit, this should be ° prah īṇāḥ.
49 This equivalence follows from Sanskrit lexicographical sources such as 
the Śabdakalpadruma (R ājā Rādhākānta Deva 1825–57/II: 47) where 
kāmara ṅga is called the “ bhāṣā,” i.e., vernacular, form of karmara ṅga. It is 
perhaps useful to point out that this understanding of the relationship 
between the two variants is not necessarily in accordance with historical 
reality.[Vasantatilak ā]
puṇyaṁ may āptam atu (-9)laṁ yam ih ādya caitya ṁ
niṣpādya tena  (-8) bhavas āgarato hi p āraṁ |
tr̥ṣṇ(ā)(-7)taraṅgabh r̥śacañcalaraudran ādā(-6)t
satvāḥ pray āntu sukhinas trima (-5)laprah īnāḥ48 ||
[Anu ṣṭhubh]
yāti prajvalita ṁ (-4) ghora ṁ bhedako raurava ṁ pā(-3)raṁ
divyakalpasahasr āṇi (-2) svarge ti ṣṭhati p ālaka °i (-1)ti | | ||  ||
Translation
... they shall a tt ain the immortal state.
The incomparable merit that I have obtained by building 
a shrine here, may it serve [all] beings to pass happily and 
freed from the three stains to the other shore of the ocean of 
existence, which is strongly wavering and dreadfully noisy 
due to the waves of desire. 
The transgressor [of this foundation] goes to the burning 
dreadful Raurava [hell]; he who protects [it] abides in heaven 
through thousands of divine aeons.
The Contents of the New Inscriptions
Historical Geography: K āmara ṅga
Inscription A. 1 opens with eleven lines from which li tt le 
information can be recovered, but which do include the tan-
talizing word kāmara ṅgeśvara. The word kāmara ṅga, also exist-
ing in a variant karmara ṅga, 49 in Sanskrit denotes the star fruit 

--- [Page 22] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 302
(Averrhoa carambola L.),50 and known as a toponym too. The 
toponym has been subjected to a very learned study by S. 
Lévi (1923),51 whose argument tended to identify it with the 
site Langkasuka on the east coast of the Malay peninsula, 
known principally from Chinese sources and archaeological 
ﬁ nds. The chapter dedicated to this ancient polity in the 
recent summary of historical-archaeological research on the 
Malay Peninsula by M. Jacq-Hergoualc’h (2002, chapter 
seven) does not refer to Lévi’s theory at all. I am unsure why 
Lévi’s identi ﬁ cation of Langkasuka with Karmara ṅga/
Kāmara ṅga—and even a third variant: Carmara ṅga—of San-
skrit sources remains unmentioned, but it is hard to avoid 
the impression that it is merely because it escaped subse-
quent scholarly a tt ention in this ﬁ eld.52
Two inscriptions of Burma that have come to light since 
Lévi wrote seem to require a re-interpretation of the Indian 
textual data that he collected. The ﬁ rst is the present inscrip-
tion, from which we alas learn nothing more with certainty 
than that K āmara ṅga was a name known in ancient Arakan, 
whether as plant-name or as toponym; the second is the frag-
mentary Sanskrit inscription found in Śrīkṣetra several 
decades ago and partly deciphered by D.C. Sircar.53 It refers 
repeatedly to a “lord of Kala śapura” ( kalaśapure śvara) called 
Śrī Parame śvara, and—judging from palaeography—is 
roughly contemporary with our inscription. The second gives 
some reason to favor the hypothesis that K āmara ṅgeśvara in 
the ﬁ rst denoted the “lord of K āmara ṅga,” i.e., that K āmara ṅga 
was a place name.
50 See h tt p://www.hort. purdue.edu/newcrop/morton /carambola.html. The 
webpage reproduces Morton 1987: 125–8.
51 An English translation of Lévi’s article was published as Lévi (1929), 
and it is this English version that will be cited henceforward.
52 Lévi’s arguments were summarized approvingly by R.C. Majumdar 
(1937–38/I: 73–5). The seminal contributions of Wheatley (1956, 1961), 
however, ignore Lévi, presumably by mere inadvertence, and this could 
well be why subsequent literature likewise ignores Lévi.
53 See for references n2 above, item 2.

--- [Page 23] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 303
Let us now look at the most important Sanskrit textual 
citations furnished by Lévi, taken from T. Ga ṇapati Śāstrī’s 
edition of the Mañju śriyam ūlakalpa :54
Mañju śriyam ūlakalpa  20 (vol. I, p. 206)
 vidik ṣu bhairava ṁ nāde ūrdhvam u tt arato bhavet |
 kāmarūpeśvaro hany ā gau ḍādhyak ṣeṇa sarvad ā ||
 lauhity āt parato ye vai jan ādhyak ṣātha j īvina ḥ55 |
 kalaśāhvāḥ kārmara ṅgāś56 ca s āmata ṭyāś57 ca va ṅgakāḥ ||
 “If there is a terrifying sound in the intermediate direc-
tions, upward, northward, the lord of K āmarūpa will inev-
itably be killed by the overlord of Gau ḍa; [so also] the lord 
of the people and dependents ( jīvin = upaj īvin?) beyond the 
Lauhitya (Brahmaputra), the ones called Kala śa, those of 
Karmara ṅga, of Samata ṭa and of Va ṅga.”
Mañju śriyam ūlakalpa  22 (vol. I, p. 232)
 asur āṇāṁ bhaved v ācā gau ḍapau ṇḍrodbhav ā sadā |
 yath ā gau ḍajana śreṣṭhaṁ ruta ṁ śabdavibh ūṣitam |
54 For some more information on this extremely rich text, and for the 
argument in favor of the assumption that its original title, more commonly 
cited as Mañju śrīmūlakalpa , in fact contained the element °śriya° , see Delhey 
2012. On the complex issue of the dating of its various parts, in Sanskrit, 
Chinese, and Tibetan versions, see Matsunaga 1985. For present purposes, 
it is su ﬃ  cient to state that the cited passages may be assumed to transmit 
geographical knowledge in Northeastern India of about the last quarter of 
the ﬁ rst millennium ce. The Sanskrit text is notoriously di ﬃ  cult to trans-
late, and my renderings of the cited passages are no more than approxima-
tions of what might have been intended. I thank Péter-Dániel Szántó for 
his several suggestions sent to me by email in January 2015, helping me to 
try to understand the meaning of the passages I cite in this article, and 
Martin Delhey for having checked the Sanskrit manuscripts available for 
these passages, an e ﬀ ort that alas has yielded virtually no new philological 
insights.
55 janādhyak ṣātha j īvinaḥ: em. (Szántó), jarādhyak ṣātha j īvinā Ed. A palm-
leaf and two paper mss. consulted by Delhey con ﬁ rm the reading janā° for 
the ﬁ rst word.
56 kalaśāhvāḥ kārmara ṅgāś: em., kalaśāhvā carmara ṅgāś Ed.
57 sāmata ṭyāś: em., samotady āś Ed. A palm-leaf manuscript consulted by 
Delhey, reading samata ṭyāś, lends support to my emendation.

--- [Page 24] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 304
 tathā daity agaṇaśreṣṭhaṁ58 ruta ṁ cāpi niyojayet | |
 teṣāṁ parya ṭantānāṁ samant ānāṁ ca purojav ām |
 yakṣarākṣasapret ānāṁ nāgāṁś cāpi sap ūtanām |
 sarve ṣām asurapak ṣāṇā vaṅgasamata ṭāśrayāt59 ||
 harikele kala śamukhye ca carmara ṅge hy a śeṣataḥ |
 sarve ṣāṁ janapad āṁ vā tath ā teṣāṁ tu kalpayet | |
 “ Always the speech indigenous to Pau ṇḍra in Gau ḍa is that 
of the Asuras. As the best cry of the people of Gau ḍa, 
adorned with words, so also he should consider (?, niyo-
jayet ) the best cry of the horde of demons. And because all 
those wandering servants, Yak ṣas, R ākṣasas, ghosts, ser-
pents and goblins, siding with the demons, each take 
refuge in Va ṅga and Samata ṭa, in Harikela, the best [city 
called] Kala śa and Carmara ṅga, he should so imagine [the 
speech] of all those regions.”
Mañju śriyam ūlakalpa  31 (vol. II, p. 332)
 r̥ṣīṇāṁ tu k āmarūpī tu v ācā viśvarūpiṇām |
 pañc ābhijñ āṁ60 tu s ā vācā r̥ṣīṇāṁ parikalpit ā ||
 yā tu s āmata ṭī61 vācā yā ca v ācā harikelik ā |
 avyakt ām asphu ṭāṁ62 caiva ḍakāraparini śritā ||
 lakārabahul ā yā vācā paiśācīvācam ucyate |
 karmara ṅgākhyadv īpeṣu nāḍikerasamudbhave63 ||
 dvīpavāruṣake caiva nagnav ālisamudbhave |
 yavadv īpe v ā64 satt veṣu tadanyadv īpasamudbhav ā ||
 vācā rakārabahul ā tu v ācā asphu ṭatāṁ gatā |
 avyakt ā niṣṭhurā caiva sakrodh āṁ pretayoni ṣu | |
 “The variegated speech of K āmarūpa is that of the sages. 
That speech is ﬁ tt ing for the seers endowed with the ﬁ ve 
super-knowledges. The speech of Samata ṭa and of Harikela 
is indistinct and unclear, being pervaded (? parini śrita) with 
sounds ḍ. And the language existing in the (is)lands called 
58 daityaga ṇaśreṣṭhaṁ: em., daityaga ṇā śreṣṭhaṁ Ed.
59 ° samata ṭāśrayāt: em., ° sāmata ṭāśrayāt Ed.
60 pañc ābhijñ āṁ: em. (Szántó), pañc ābhijña ṁ Ed.
61 sāmata ṭī: em., sāmā taṭī Ed.
62 avyakt ām asphu ṭāṁ: em., avyakt āṁ sphu ṭāṁ Ed.
63 nāḍikerasamudbhave : em. (Lévi silently), nāḍikesaramudbhave  Ed.
64 yavadv īpe v ā: ed. (Lévi silently), yavadv īpivā Ed.

--- [Page 25] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 305
Karmara ṅga and N āḍikera is called Pai śācī because it is rich 
in sounds l. And the language existing among the Naked-
Vālins of V āruṣaka-island, and one existing among crea-
tures on Yava-island or other islands is rich in sounds r and 
[hence] becomes unclear, indistinct, rough, angry toward 
ghost-wombs.”
To these passages we must add another one which could not 
yet be used by Lévi because it appeared in a volume pub-
lished only in 1925:
Mañju śriyam ūlakalpa  5365 (vol. III, p. 648)
 sidhyate ca tad ā tārā yak ṣarāṭ caiva mah ābalaḥ |
 harikele karmara ṅge ca k āmarūpe kala śāhvaye ||
 “ And then T ārā is realized, with the Yak ṣa-king Mah ābala, 
in Harikela, Karmara ṅga, K āmarūpa and [the city] called 
Kala śa.”
Furthermore, Lévi mentions (1929: 107) that “the B ṛhatsa ṁhitā, 
XIV, 9, in its catalogue of the peoples of the South-
East ( āgney ī) combines V ṛṣa-Nālikera-Carmadv īpaḥ; Kern 
(J.R.A.S., n.s., V, 83) has translated this as “The Island of Bulls, 
of Cocoas, of Tree-barks,” but the mention of Nālikera  by 
the side of carma  clearly proves that Carmadv īpa corres-
ponds here to Carma- or Karma-ra ṅgadv īpa of the 
Mañju śrīmūlakalpa.”66 The names Karmara ṅga, Carmara ṅga, 
65 On the date of chapter 53, see Sanderson (2009: 300n129): “The pro-
phetic history of Indian Buddhism, the Rājavy ākaraṇa, chapter 53 of the 
published Mañju śriyam ūlakalpa , cannot be earlier than the late eighth 
century since it knows of the P āla king Gop āla (r. c. 750–775) (53.628; and 
53.816: tataḥ pare ṇa *bh ūpālo gop ālo [em.: bhūpālā gop ālā Ed.] dāsajīvinaḥ | 
bhavi ṣyati). Since it does not mention his successor Dharmap āla it is unlikely 
to be later.” Our verse occurs in a section to which Jayaswal (1934: 72–73 
and ६६७) has given the title “Religious Practice in the East, South, Insulin-
dia, and Further India.”
66 The passage corresponds to Br̥hatsa ṁhitā 54.108 in the edition of H. 
Kern (1864–65). Lévi (1929: 105) also discusses two passages from B āṇa’s 
Harṣacarita  that mention the adjective kārmara ṅga, but these throw no light 
on the geographical situation of Karmara ṅga. He ﬁ nally cites the 
Kath āsarits āgara and a famous illustrated Nepalese manuscript for a tt esta-
tions of a Kala śa(vara)pura.

--- [Page 26] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 306
or even Carma can, in turn, all safely be considered variants 
of the name K āmara ṅga. W e have seen a series of passages 
from the Mañju śriyam ūlakalpa where they are associated 
repeatedly with other toponyms: 
Toponym Current Identi ﬁ cations67Named
Kala śa Martaban 3×
Harikela Chi tt agong area 3×
Samata ṭa Comilla area 3×
Gauḍa Present Bihar and West Bengal 2×
Kāmarūpa Assam 2×
Nārikela Nicobar islands 2×
Vaṅga Southern Bengal 2×
Vr̥ṣa/Vāruṣa Barus 2×
I have listed in the table only those toponyms associated 
contextually more than once with Karmara ṅga or variants 
thereof. All of the names identi ﬁ able here situate us clearly 
in and around Bengal, while a certain southeastward pro-
gression is noticeable from Gau ḍa in north India to Barus on 
the northwest coast of Sumatra, not to mention Yavadv īpa, 
whose identi ﬁ cation is contested and may not always have 
indicated the same place for each Sanskrit author, but in my 
opinion here most probably designated Java (see Gri ﬃ  ths 
2013). Unless Kala śa and our Karmara ṅga/K āmara ṅga stand 
for places in present Burma, this large sector of the eastern 
coast of the Bay of Bengal will be unrepresented. The identi-
ﬁ cation of Kala śa(pura) “Pot (city)” as Martaban was pro-
posed by Gutman (2001), who gave a plausible but 
non-conclusive argument and did not o ﬀ er an explanation 
for why the single inscription mentioning this place name—
the Śrīkṣetra inscription mentioned above—was found at 
Śrīkṣetra and not at Martaban.
67 On Kala śa, see Gutman 2001. On N ārikela, see Chakravarti 1998. On 
Vr̥ṣa/Vāruṣa, see Wolters 1967: 186 and Perret 2009: 543n1. On all other 
toponyms, see Ghosh 2011.

--- [Page 27] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 307
In view of the fact that the name Kala śapura is docu-
mented at Śrīkṣetra while the name K āmara ṅga is docu-
mented in Arakan, and in view of Karmara ṅga’s close 
association with Kala śapura, with Harikela, and with 
Samata ṭa, it seems most natural to think for the identi ﬁ cation 
of Kala śapura and Karmara ṅga/K āmara ṅga of the two prin-
cipal centers of Buddhist culture of ﬁ rst-millennium Burma, 
that is Arakan and Śrīkṣetra, neither of whose names are 
otherwise recorded in local sources for this period.68 The 
Sanskrit name Karmara ṅga/K āmara ṅga may be seen as an 
att empt to render in the guise of this language an indigenous 
name: Lévi (1929: 112 ﬀ .) already suspected the presence in 
this name, as well as that of K āmarūpa, of a non-Aryan “pre-
formative” kam. Furthermore, it may be that Old Burmese 
sources have preserved the same name in Burmese guise as 
kaṁ raṁ or kamḥ yaṁ, again possible designations of Arakan.69 
68 It must be admi tt ed that some variant of the name Śrīkṣetra was already 
current by the seventh century, but it is a tt ested with certainty only in 
Chinese sources. See Gri ﬃ  ths and Lammerts (2015: 996), for a brief over-
view of the relevant evidence. I imagine that the religious name Śrīkṣetra 
may have coexisted with a political designation of roughly the same local-
ity as Kala śapura. But of course I cannot exclude that the la tt er designated 
some other locality further south in present Burma. See Frasch (2002: 62) 
for some possibly relevant Pagan-period evidence on the importance of 
pott ery in lower Burma.
69 The account of the fall of Śrīkṣetra in the Burmese chronicles mentions 
an expedition to the kamḥ yaṁ country, which Luce (1985/I: 51n25) provi-
sionally identi ﬁ es as “possibly North Arakan Mah āmuni.” As mentioned 
elsewhere by the same scholar (1959: 56), a name kaṁ raṁ, which is likely 
to be an earlier spelling of the same toponym, is found in Pagan epigraphy. 
For the inscription in question, dated 598 be (1236 ce), see Nyein Maung 
et al. 1972–2013/I: 293, line 36; it is number 273 in Duroiselle’s list (1921), 
and plate 94a in portfolio 1 of Inscriptions of Burma  (Luce and Pe Maung 
Tin 1934–56). Luce expressed some hesitation as to the authenticity of the 
inscription saying that it “looks original, but the dates in it are so wild that 
one has a certain hesitation in accepting its unsupported evidence.” I thank 
Christian Lammerts for all the references to primary and secondary source 
material furnished in this note. He further informs me by email: “I have 
located quite a number of additional literary/chronicle references to kaṁ 
raṁ and variants. These all date to c. 1500 ce or later. The name rakhui ṅ 

--- [Page 28] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 308
I oﬀ er these hypotheses here only as possibilities to be 
explored in further research, but at the very least my identi-
ﬁ cation of K āmara ṅga as Arakan seems to be a viable alterna-
tive for the current identi ﬁ cation as Langkasuka, going back 
to the work of Lévi and Wheatley.70
History of Buddhism: Monastic Life and the 
Role of Mah āyāna
Inscriptions A. 1 and A. 2 are the ﬁ rst Arakan Sanskrit inscrip-
tions on record to deal with endowments to speci ﬁ c named 
monasteries. The Odein inscription concerns the endowment 
of land to the Camp ārāma vihāra for the upkeep of the saṅgha. 
The Prine Cha inscription records a donation to a monastery 
the name of which is only partly preserved but seems to have 
started with the element R āmaśūra.
itself appears ﬁ rst only in the 13th c. in central Burmese inscriptions, 
always in references to people, not to a speci ﬁ c territory or kingdom.” See 
also Frasch 2002: 70.
70 My interpretation seems to ﬁ t equally well, if not be tt er, with the top-
onymic evidence from Chinese authors of the seventh century, among 
whom Xuanzang (Wheatley 1956: 397, 1961: 256), who wrote: “Thence 
[from Samata ṭa] north-eastwards is the kingdom of Shih-li-ch ’a-ta-lo  
(Śrīkṣetra). Next to the south-east, in a recess of the ocean, is the kingdom 
of Chia-mo-lang-chia  [Kāmala ṅka]. Next to the east is the kingdom of To-lo-
po-ti  [Dvāravat ī]. Next to the east is the kingdom of I-shang-na-pu-lo  
[Īśānapura]. Next to the east is the kingdom of Mo-ho-chan-po [Mah ācampa], 
which is the same as Lin-i .” Lévi (1929: 104) had already proposed that the 
Chinese rendering might rather represent K āmara ṅga. It seems to me that 
Wheatley (1956: 406–7, 1961: 262–3) was mistaken to dismiss the evidence 
of the seventh-century Chinese sources as distorted, which led him to 
conﬂ ate the Chia-mo-lang-chia  (䘖᪙⎚䘖 , Pinyin: Jiamolangjia) known to 
the authors of these sources, with Langkasuka on the Malay peninsula 
known with certainty only from signi ﬁ cantly later sources. For the sake of 
completeness, I must mention that the name kāmara ṅga ﬁ gures also in the 
Cambodian Sanskrit inscriptions K. 56 (ninth century) and K. 1294 (pre-
Angkorian), certainly as toponym in the former, possibly in the la tt er. The 
contexts are insu ﬃ  cient to exclude the possibility that these passages 
denote Arakan, although it seems more plausible to assume, in the face of 
the Cambodian epigraphic evidence, that the ancient landscape of main-
land Southeast Asia knew more than one K āmara ṅga.

--- [Page 29] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 309
The second inscription is unique for the unusually precise 
manner in which this inscription records the details of the 
endowment—unusually, that is, for Sanskrit epigraphy, 
where such business ma tt ers tend to be dealt with in a vague, 
formulaic manner. The manner in which the business portion 
is recorded here is much more reminiscent of the way in 
which such information is presented in vernacular epigraphy 
of Southeast Asia, exempli ﬁ ed very well by the corpus of Old 
Burmese inscriptions.71 The only example in a Sanskrit 
inscription of a comparable list of items endowed to a reli-
gious institution known to me is that in the recently discov-
ered copper-plate of Vainyagupta dated 185 Gupta Era or 502 
ce (Furui forthcoming), which—perhaps signi ﬁ cantly—stems 
from Samata ṭa, i.e., a region of Bengal that lies very close to 
Arakan, as we already saw above. That inscription, after indi-
cating the extent of land donated to a community of Ājīvaka 
ascetics, adds the following list of movable items (ll. 43–46):
kānsaśrapaṇāḥ 4 k ānsagalantak āḥ 4 balibh ājana tt raya 3 
tāmragalantaka 2 dantap īṭhikāḥ 8 dantaparyya ṅkā 6 kalantaka 
3 br̥hatk ānsanadik ā 10 śānaśilā 3 kānsata ṣṭhakāḥ 40  ka ṭorikāḥ 
40  v āsi 5 ch ātt rā 20  kudd ālikāḥ 8 ku ṭhārikāḥ 8 uñccha 4 
nikh ātanā 8  karapa tt ra 3 ka ṭṭārikā 7
“Brass cooking vessels 4. Brass water jars 4. Three vessels 
for o ﬀ erings 3. Copper water jars 2. Ivory stools 8. Ivory 
palanquins 6. Kalantaka s 3. Large brass trumpets 10. 
Whetstones 3. Brass taṣṭhakas 40. Small cups 40. Adzes 5. 
Parasols 20. Small spades 8. Small axes 8. Gleaning 
(baskets?) 4. Digging (instruments?) 8. Saws 3. Small 
daggers 7.”
The problems caused by the poor state of preservation of the 
stone are in our case compounded with the obscurity of many 
of the terms used in the list, although a few elements ( kāṁsa/
kānsa, bhājana, vāsikā=vāsi, kaṭṭārikā) are shared with the list in 
Vainyagupta’s grant. For the background of the monastic 
71 See the inscription from the Thahte Mokku temple, Shwezigon, Pagan, 
edited and translated in Pe Maung Tin and Luce 1963.

--- [Page 30] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 310
usage of such household implements, see von Hinüber 2009 
(esp. p. 13 on vāsi and sūci).
The Prine Cha inscription twice (ll. 8 and 15) uses the 
expression vandhadravya  (i.e. bandhadravya ), which appears to 
be a technical term implying certain conditions of use to 
which the endowment was subjected. Unfortunately, in both 
occurrences the immediately preceding word is hard to read, 
but does not seem to be the same: especially, the segment 
guru  in line 8 is merely a possibility among others, this par-
ticular one perhaps receiving some support from the exis-
tence of the term gurudravya  in at least one Buddhist Sanskrit 
source.72 I have not found any clear indication of what may 
be implied by the term bandha  “binding, a tt achment,” but 
cognate terms do occasionally ﬁ gure elsewhere in Buddhist 
epigraphy. See e.g. Schopen (1997: 260–1), about “the Bud-
dha’s location, his proprietorship and his permanent resi-
dency in local monasteries,” illustrated by the example of “a 
ﬁ fth or sixth century inscription from Cave VI at Kuda” on 
the west coast of India. It says, in Schopen’s citation and 
translation:
deyadharmmoya ṁ śākyabhik ṣoḥ saṁghadevasya atra ca 
cheṁdinak ṣetra{ ṁ} badhv ā dīpam ūlya-buddhasya da tt aṁ {||} 
yo lopaye{t} pa{ ṁ}camah āpātakaba{sa ṁ}yukto bhave{t}
“This is the gift of the Śākyabhik ṣu Sa ṁghadeva. And 
having here a tt ached the Che ṁdina ﬁ eld it is given to 
the Buddha as capital for lamps. Whoever would disrupt 
{this endowment} would incur the ﬁ ve great sins.”
Here, the word badhv ā (i.e. baddhv ā) is, like vandha  in our 
inscription, derived from the verb bandh  “to bind, a tt ach.” 
72 At the beginning of book 2 of the Sphu ṭārthā Śrīghan ācārasaṁgraha ṭīkā 
by Jayarak ṣita, we read: anādhānīyasyety ādinā gurubh ūtatvād gurudravya ṁ 
sāṁghikam eva | anyad gurudravya ṃ na bhavati s āṁghikasyaiva gurudravya-
tvena vivak ṣitatv āt |. With some adaptation from Derre tt ’s translation (1983: 
36), I propose that this means: “ ‘Not to be given in loan’, etc., means the 
‘heavy property’ that is sāṅghika  (i.e., that belongs to the saṅgha collectively) 
because of its importance. No other item is ‘heavy property’; only [prop-
erty that is] sāṅghika  is meant by ‘heavy property’.”

--- [Page 31] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 311
Schopen explains that “[w]hile the full technical sense of 
badhv ā is not entirely clear, I have translated it as “having 
att ached,” intending by that some of the legal sense of the 
English phrase. It is, however, clear from the imprecation that 
we are dealing with an ongoing endowment.” Following a 
suggestion of Christian Lammerts, I o ﬀ er here the hypothesis 
that the term bandhadravya  was intended to specify a donation 
to the saṅgha collectively rather than to any individual monk, 
and that what is called bandhadravya  (or even gurubandhadra-
vya, if my reading at the beginning of l. 8 is correct) corre-
sponds to what is called garubha ṇḍa in Pali vinaya  terminology,73 
and gurudravya  in the Sanskrit source referred to above.74
From the ﬁ rst studies of Arakan Sanskrit epigraphy 
onwards, it has been widely accepted that Buddhism in ﬁ rst-
millennium Arakan was somehow “Mah āyāna.” Thus, John-
ston himself concluded (1944: 371):
It seems then that the Mah āyāna in Arakan was repre-
sented either by Mah āyānist Sarv āstivādins or by a 
Mah āyānist school which derived ultimately from that 
sect, such as the Vijñ ānavādins, who took from it much 
of their dogmatics.
Gutman (1998: 108) believed that she could con ﬁ rm the doc-
umentary evidence used by Johnston on the basis of her art-
historical study of Buddhist relief sculptures from Selagiri, to 
surmise that these reliefs “illustrate the spread, in the sixth 
or the seventh century, of Mahayanist in ﬂ uence from the 
schools of Northeast India to Arakan.” This is not the place 
and I am not quali ﬁ ed to enter into a discussion of the prob-
lematic question what Mah āyāna actually is. But the pieces 
73 Meaning property which cannot leave the monastery, is not heritable, 
and which cannot be given away by individual monks. See Lingat 1937: 
442–60.
74 See n72. Jayarak ṣita was active around 500 ce (Derret 1983: 7) and based 
his work on various vinaya s, which means that the terminology he used is 
also liable to have been known in Arakan in the second half of the ﬁ rst 
millennium.

--- [Page 32] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 312
of evidence teased from Ānandacandra’s praśasti (A. 71) by 
Johnston in support of his conclusion are w eak and few in 
number. The insistence on Mah āyāna seems partly deter-
mined by a view, now outdated, of what Mah āyāna was in 
opposition to, for instance, the Buddhism of the “Elders” 
(sthavira , thera ). The value of some evidence adduced by later 
scholars, such as the use of the “common Mah āyāna formula” 
and the occurrence of the term śākyabhik ṣu in the bell inscrip-
tion A. 203 is contested.75 The manner in which the inscrip-
tions A. 1 and A. 60 express the motivations for donation is 
at best a potential indication of an underlying Mah āyāna 
ideology. The sum of evidence so far brought to bear perhaps 
does not actually su ﬃ  ce to prove that in the Buddhism of 
ﬁ rst-millennium Arakan, Mah āyāna ideology and practice 
were signi ﬁ cant let alone predominant, even if only among 
the elites who have left records of their religious activities in 
inscriptions. Nevertheless, while none of the Arakan Sanskrit 
inscriptions is entirely explicit about the role of Mah āyāna, it 
is clear that a Mah āyāna identity was considered important 
in nearby Samata ṭa, and for this I may again refer to the epi-
graphical record of the Vainyagupta who ruled there at the 
beginning of the sixth century. For in his Gunaighar copper-
plate grant of 188 Gupta Era, or 506 ce, we read in lines 3–4 
about a teacher Śāntideva called mah āyānika śākyabhik ṣu and 
about an Avalokite śvarāśramavih āra; then in line 5 about a 
mah āyānika(?)vaivar tt ikabhik ṣusaṁgha “community of non-
returning Mah āyānist monks.”76
While we remain in the dark about the possible presence 
of elements of the saṅgha studying canonical texts in Sanskrit, 
75 See n23 above and Kyaw Minn Htin 2011: 403. On the term śākyabhik ṣu, 
see Schopen 1979. The donation statements added to some of the Arakan 
ye dharm āḥ inscriptions collected in Kyaw Minn Htin’s article contain vari-
ants of the “common Mah āyāna formula.” See, however, Cousins 2003 and 
again the response in Schopen 2005: 244–6. I thank Christian Lammerts and 
Peter Skilling for sharing with me their views, which I make my own, on 
the (limited) pertinence of these elements.
76 This inscription was edited by D.C. Bha tt acharyya (1930). On its impor-
tance in the present connection, see also Schopen 1997: 261, 2005: 13, 247.

--- [Page 33] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 313
we have some positive evidence suggesting that some monks 
at least had access to Pali scriptures. While most ye dharm āḥ 
citation inscriptions are in (often garbled) Sanskrit, at least 
one specimen of a Pali recension of the same stanza has so 
far been recorded.77 More signi ﬁ cant in this context is an 
inscription, which presents less frequently cited Pali canoni-
cal material, 78 along with another that seems to be in Pali but 
for which it has so far been impossible to identify any canon-
ical source.79 No comparable density of Sanskrit donative 
epigraphy in co-presence with Pali citation inscriptions 
appears to exist elsewhere in any period in the greater Bay 
of Bengal context.
Political History: Dharmavijaya
Inscription A. 2 in all likelihood included, in its original state, 
an absolute date, and is the only Sanskrit inscription of 
Arakan known so far to express a date in absolute terms. Alas 
not enough is preserved of the dating formula to establish 
what date was expressed. We are no luckier with regard to 
the name of the ruling king, of whose name only the ﬁ rst two 
syllables (l. 3: dharmm ā) are preserved. The inscription also 
reveals to us another member of the Arakan ruling class, 
namely the elder brother of the king. His name is not explic-
itly stated in the parts of the inscription that have been pre-
served, although there is a chance that his name started with 
rāmaśūra°, if we assume that the vihāra whose endowment 
77 A. 56, slab from Phayagyi shrine in Ves ālī: nr. 3 in Kyaw Minn Htin 
2011. It is noteworthy that, in contradistinction to the item mentioned in 
the next note, and all other Pali inscriptions from Myanmar known to me, 
this one and A. 205 mentioned in n79, are not engraved in a form of script 
belonging to the Southern Br āhmī group, but are engraved in the same 
form of Late Northern Br āhmī as will be discussed below for such inscrip-
tions as A. 1, A. 38, A. 55, A. 206, etc.
78 A. 207, slab from Wuntitaung: Gutman 1976: 114–7. The text has paral-
lels in Majjhimanik āya 1.72–3 and Aṅgutt aranik āya 2.8–9.
79 A. 205, fragmentary pillar inscription from Thinkyitaw: see Sircar 
1957–58: 103, plate B.

--- [Page 34] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 314
this inscription records was—as is often the case—named 
after the person making the endowment.80
More fruitful for political history is the inscription A. 1, 
which is the ﬁ rst inscription issued by Dharmavijaya to have 
come to light, although it is not the ﬁ rst time this name ﬁ gures 
in the historical record. Besides the availability of a number of 
coins with legends mentioning his name (see for example the 
one shown here as ﬁ g. 9),81 this ruler was known so far only 
from his appearance in the king list of Ānandacandra’s praśasti 
(A. 71). After mention of a king Vajra śakti in stanzas XXXVII–
XXXVIII, we read in stanzas XXXIX and XL:
śrīdharmajayasa ṁyukto lok ānugrahatatpara ḥ |
(37) tatpa ścād abhavad dh īraḥ śrīdharmavijayo n r̥paḥ ||
ṣaṭtriṁśad avd āny upabhujya r ājyaṁ
80 See Sanderson 2009. Among many examples of Śaiva, Vai ṣṇava, and 
Buddhist foundations named after their founder mentioned in study, see 
especially the cases on pp. 85–6. See already Johnston 1944: 371.
81 A coin of Dharmavijaya was depicted in Luce 1985/II: pl. 2 nr. 19. Two 
specimens are illustrated in Gutman 1976: pl. XL. See also Mahlo 2012: 84 
and the references cited below in n88.
Figure 9  A silver coin with legend dharmmavijaya  from a hoard found 
in 2014 in Gazipur district (about 45 km north of Dhaka city), in Dhaka 
division, Bangladesh; collection Noman Nasir, Dhaka.

--- [Page 35] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 315
dharme ṇa nītyā ca jayena caiva |
ratna (38)trayānusmara ṇābhiyog āt
sa devaloka ṁ tuṣitaṁ pray āt* ||
“ After him, there was a brave king, the fortunate Dhar-
mavijaya, a tt ended by fortune, religion and victory, 
zealous in doing kindness to the world.
After enjoying kingship for 36 years because of religion, 
policy and victory, through practicing remembrance of 
the Three Jewels he passed away to the Tu ṣita heaven.”82
The relationship between Dharmavijaya and Vajra śakti, if 
any, is not made explicit; Dharmavijaya’s successor Naren-
dravijaya, on the other hand, is explicitly stated to have been 
Dharmavijaya’s son (stanza XLI). Dharmavijaya is described 
here, as in A. 1, as a devout Buddhist who ruled for thirty-six 
years. In the absence of any inscriptions issued by Dharma-
vijaya, to situate this ruler in absolute chronology scholars 
have so far relied exclusively on interpretations of the chro-
nology implicit in the king list of Ānandacandra’s praśasti, 
engraved on the Shi tt aung pagoda pillar at Mrauk U (for-
merly called Mrohaung), which was issued in the ninth regnal 
year of the king. The basic line of argument was proposed by 
Johnston (1944: 365):
It is, however, fortunately easy to place the important 
inscription of Ānandacandra. Obviously it is closely 
related to, but later than, the Aphsad inscription of 
Ādityasena ( Corpus Inscr. Indicarum , iii, pp. 200 ﬀ .); the 
substantial di ﬀ erence is in the form of ja, which at 
Aphsad shows the ﬁ rst beginning of the change e ﬀ ected 
in the second half of the seventh century, whereas on the 
Mrohaung pillar the change has been carried through. 
The script of Ya śovarmadeva’s inscription at N āland ā, 
which belongs undoubtedly to the ﬁ rst half of the eighth 
century ( vide Bhandarkar’s List, No. 2105), is almost 
entirely identical with that of Ānandacandra’s inscrip-
82 Cited after ed. and transl. Johnston 1944: 376, 381.— avdāny: abdāny 
Johnston.— pray āt*: pray ātaḥ Johnston. Barne tt  notes ‘The stone has pray āt, 
with ﬁ nal t.’ It is necessary to emend and pray ātaḥ seems the best choice.

--- [Page 36] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 316
tion, both in the form of the le tt ers and in style of writing. 
[...] Among noteworthy peculiarities are the peculiar 
forms given to consonants when they occur at the end 
of a hemistich, in place of the virāma used at N āland ā.
This citation illustrates something of the con ﬁ dence with 
which earlier generations of Indologists thought they could 
arrive at datings based on a very limited number of palaeo-
graphic comparisons, and concentration on a very small 
number of test-le tt ers. Almost all subsequent scholarship has 
retained unquestioned the basic comparison that is made 
here with the N āland ā stone inscription of Ya śovarmadeva. 
Sircar (1957–58: 108) has contributed to eternalizing it by 
proposing the very precise date of 729 ce for the N āland ā 
inscription. But it is important to remember that that inscrip-
tion itself contains no date, and that Sircar’s date was no more 
than an approximation. And even if that approximation may 
be roughly on the mark, the palaeographic similarity claimed 
by Johnston is not described in any detail, either by Johnston 
himself or by Sircar. As long as the similarities are not posi-
tively shown, and as long as it is not asked whether any other 
inscriptions, especially ones whose provenance lies closer to 
Arakan, might reveal equally or even more striking palaeo-
graphic similarities with A. 71, the Johnston-Sircar approach 
to dating this inscription must be treated as no more than a 
weakly supported claim.
Nevertheless it is this claim that has become the founda-
tion for dating backwards from Ānandacandra’s ninth year 
all of his predecessors ﬁ guring in the king list. This king list 
has, moreover, been treated as a factual description of politi-
cal history, with as major corollary that the list has been 
interpreted as a sequential presentation of rulers.83 And yet, 
in a seminal article published in 1975, David P. Henige has 
made some important cautionary statements about the inher-
83 See most recently Mahlo 2012: 88–95, illustrating how the king list is 
commonly interpreted sequentially and how each king is situated in abso-
lute chronology.

--- [Page 37] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 317
84 Thus, for instance, the case of N ītivijaya, discussed by Mahlo (2012: 
99): “Since King Nitivijaya is not mentioned on the inscribed stela [ sic, the 
pillar-inscription A. 71 is intended—A.G.], he could have reigned after 
Anandacandra. However, the name su ﬃ  x suggests a possible chronologi-
cal relationship to Dharmavijaya [...]”.
85 Comparable genealogical expressions are known elsewhere in the San-
skrit cosmopolis. See Barne tt ’s reference (in Johnston 1944: 370n1) to his 
own paper in EI 19 (1926–27), dealing with six inscriptions of the Konkan 
area in western India, issued by kings claiming descent from a Vidy ādhara 
Jimūtavāhana (“Could-Vehicle”) and mentioning also a khacarava ṁśa “bird-
lineage”; see on the former genealogical claim now Schmiedchen 2014: 216. 
Descent from an ancestor V īrabhadra, who was born from a peahen’s egg, 
is claimed in inscriptions of the Ādi-Bhañjas of Orissa, in Eastern India (see 
the stanza quoted by Das Gupta 1931: 232; see also Tripathy 1974: II–III 
and for the stanza in question her inscriptions 1–9).ent limitations of such epigraphic king lists for establishing 
chronological sequences (538, 541):
The ﬁ rst, if apparently not the most obvious, of these 
deﬁ ciencies is that most of the genealogies in the inscrip-
tions were never designed to present a connected, coher-
ent and comprehensive genealogical structure or king 
list but only to present the immediate (or in some cases 
more remote) ancestors of the executor of the inscrip-
tion. This being so, they ineluctably practice collateral 
suppression. [...] They can be incomplete in several 
ways—by excluding collaterals, by omi tt ing earlier 
rulers, and, of course, by not including any members of 
the line who may have ruled after the inscriber of the 
record.
Some indications that the case of Ānandacandra’s king list 
may not have been an exception have already come to light, 
notably in the form of coin issues found in Arakan of rulers 
not ﬁ guring in the list.84 In fact, the Arakan inscriptions them-
selves quite explicitly speak of distinct lineages, and suggest 
that they would—at times, if not habitually—have been in 
competition. Thus Dharmavijaya is presented in A. 1 as a 
sprout of the “Bird-lineage,”85 and as having brought woe 
upon a “Rudra-lineage.” Since Rudra and Īśa are alter egos 

--- [Page 38] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 318
of Śiva, this rudr ānvaya  is certainly the same as the īśānvaya  
in A. 71, st. XXXII and XLII.86 It is tempting to speculate that 
the terms rudr ānyava  and īśānvaya  designated the lineage of 
“devout worshipers of Śiva” ( paramam āheśvara), none of 
whose names are, alas, preserved, which is presented in the 
copper-plate inscription A. 206.87 There is thus some reason 
to be suspicious of Ānandacandra’s inscription A. 71 as 
chronological guide. In the current interpretation of the polit-
ical history of Arakan, following that guide, only nineteen 
years separated the end of the reign of Dharmavijaya and the 
beginning of that of Ānandacandra. I will argue below that 
palaeographic comparison of the types of script observed in 
the inscriptions suggests prima facie a much greater chrono-
logical distance between the two.
Before moving on to a discussion of palaeography, 
however, it is important to emphasize here that A. 1, being 
the ﬁ rst known epigraphical record of Dharmavijaya, was 
found in Arakan. This fact seems to give reason to reconsider 
the conviction expressed in several publications by numisma-
86 Cf. also the devānvaya  in stanza XXXVII. Deva, too, may be a synonym 
for Śiva.
87 Cf. on this inscription the observations of Sanderson 2009: 85–6: “a 
fragmentary copper-plate inscription ( EI 37: 13) from a site near Mrohaung 
recording a donation by queen Kimm ājuvdev ī of a village to a Buddhist 
monastery founded by herself begins by relating six generations of the 
ascendants of her husband the king. Unfortunately the names of this king 
and his ancestors have been lost through the scissoring o ﬀ  of strips from 
the top and right hand side of the plate. However, what remains conveys 
the unexpected information that all these kings were paramam āheśvaraḥ. 
The editor of the inscription assigns it to the sixth century on the grounds 
of its close palaeographic similarity to the grants of N īticandra and 
Vīracandra, and argues that if the ﬁ rst of the six kings was, as is likely, 
Dveṅcandra, the founder of the Candra dynasty, then the king in question 
was N īticandra’s father Bh ūticandra (r. c. 496–520). V īracandra, he argues, 
is excluded by the fact that one of the two Ves ālī inscriptions records his 
patronage of Buddhism. However, that a king should give to Buddhism 
and at the same time be declared a paramam āheśvaraḥ in documents issued 
by the royal chancellery is quite within the bounds of possibility, as we 
have seen.” On the religious epithets of royal patrons current in Sanskrit 
epigraphy, among which paramam āheśvara, see Schmiedchen 2011.

--- [Page 39] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 319
tists, based exclusively on the fact that some of his coins were 
excavated at Mainamati and elsewhere in what is now south-
eastern Bangladesh, that Dharmavijaya’s kingdom was cen-
tered in Samata ṭa rather than in Arakan.88
Palaeographic Comparison of the New 
Inscriptions
As noted above, scholars have almost unanimously accepted 
the chronological framework for ancient Arakan based on 
Johnston’s previously cited claim that “the script of Ya śo-
varmadeva’s inscription at N āland ā, which belongs undoubt-
edly to the ﬁ rst half of the eighth century [...], is almost 
entirely identical with that of Ānandacandra’s inscription,” a 
claim which was adopted by Sircar. The only scholar who has 
so far expressed any other opinion in this ma tt er was J. Cribb, 
who made several important observations (1986: 119–20):
Firstly, J[ohnston] and S[ircar] saw close relationships 
between the le tt ering style of a handful of Arakanese 
inscriptions of the period of earlier coin-issuing kings, 
of which one names N īticandra and another V īracandra[,] 
and Indian script styles. J and S saw a connection par-
ticularly between the style of these inscriptions and 
various late Gupta inscriptions (i.e., 5–6th century) from 
Bengal and neighbouring areas. Secondly they pointed 
to an early 8th century inscription from N āland ā as the 
88 See, for instance, Mahlo (2012: 93): “For most of his reign, King Dhar-
mavijaya resided in Mainamati in present-day Bangladesh”. Sircar (1973: 
5) mentions a coin of Dharmavijaya unearthed at Mainamati, but does not 
give any reference. Rhodes (2006: 78) shows two specimens found at an 
unknown site ostensibly near Chi tt agong, and mentions that several more 
such coins have been found in southern Tripura and in southeastern Ban-
gladesh. The coin shown here in ﬁ g. 9 was even found north of Dhaka. 
Note that B.N. Mukherjee had already argued against the association of 
Dharmavijaya with Samata ṭa (2003: 206): “a few coins of Dharmavijaya of 
Arakan could have reached the Mainamati area. Mitchiner has adduced 
no real reason for extending the la tt er’s kingdom to Samata ṭa (HCSEA, 
pp. 75–6; CHBA, p. 61)”.

--- [Page 40] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 320
closest parallel to Ānandacandra’s inscriptions. […] 
Several features of Arakanese script style before the time 
of Ānandacandra developed independently of other NE 
Indian script styles. These distinctive features observed 
in stone, metal and coin inscriptions suggest that Ara-
kanese script remained isolated from developments 
elsewhere. Changes in this script during the time of 
Ānandacandra and his immediate predecessors shows 
[sic] that this isolation persisted, but that at some point 
it was temporarily breached by a fresh input of imported 
stylistic features. These new developments were derived 
from NE India where they had evolved by the early 8th 
century, but stayed in vogue over the next two centuries. 
Consequently the palaeographic evidence derived from 
Ānandacandra’s inscription only implies a date for it 
during the 8–10th centuries. The closest parallel to the 
script style is from the neighbouring area of SE Bengal. 
This inscription bears the name of K āntideva, a king of 
Harikela.
Cribb thus adduces a palaeographic comparison geographi-
cally much closer to Arakan than the N āland ā inscription 
relied upon by Johnston and Sircar, but just as those scholars, 
does not support his claim with any concrete examples at the 
akṣara level. In the absence of a ﬁ ne-grained demonstration, 
any palaeographic judgment is bound to remain impression-
istic. That said, I share Cribb’s impression that the epigraphy 
of Harikela provides some of the most relevant comparisons 
for the Arakan corpus. And yet, despite the fact that two new 
Harikela inscriptions have become known since the publica-
tion of Cribb’s study, none of the Harikela inscriptions is 
securely dated so that the comparison does not lead us any-
where in terms of absolute chronology.89 Moreover, the 
89 An absolute chronology for the three Harikela inscriptions known so 
far has been proposed by G. Bha tt acharya, the editor of the two newly 
discovered vase inscriptions (1993: 332n18), but—in a manner that is frus-
tratingly characteristic of the scholarship in this ﬁ eld—this is done without 
any argumentation.

--- [Page 41] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 321
Harikela inscriptions only illustrate the second type of script 
mentioned by Cribb.
The inscriptions A. 2 and A. 60 now furnish two new Ara-
kanese examples of this second type, which may broadly be 
classiﬁ ed as “Siddham ātr̥kā.”90 A rare anchor for this script 
type in absolute chronology may be available in the small 
corpus of inscriptions issued by kings of the Kha ḍga family, 
whose inscriptions contain no absolute dates but who are 
assumed to have ruled in Samata ṭa in the late seventh century. 
The basis for this assumption is the hypothesis of synchro-
nism with the Chinese pilgrim Sengzhe ( ܗଢ ). This monk’s 
sojourn in Samata ṭa (Sanmodazha й᪙મੂ ) is recounted by 
Yijing (d. 713 ce) in the Biography of Eminent Monks Who Went 
to the Western World in Search of the Law During the Great Tang 
Dynasty , and coincided with the reign of a king Heluosheba-
zhe or Heluoshebatuo ( ᴧ㖵⽮䏻ѷ ), the Chinese representa-
tion of whose name has been interpreted as Har ṣabha ṭa or 
Rājabha ṭa. If the la tt er interpretation is correct, it yields a 
name resembling that of a R ājarāja or R ājarājabha ṭa att ested 
in the Ashrafpur copper-plates of Devakha ḍga.91
A. 1, on the other hand, furnishes only the second exten-
sive example available so far of the ﬁ rst script type distin-
guished by Cribb, which may provisionally be labeled as 
“Late Northeastern Br āhmī.” A secure terminus post quem  is 
available for this type. It may safely be assumed to be later 
than the Samata ṭa inscriptions of Vainyagupta, which are 
dated in the Gupta Era and belong to the early years of the 
sixth century.92 The problem lies in determining how far the 
consistently undated Arakan specimens of this second type 
90 See Dani 1986: 112–3.
91 See Chavannes (1894: 128 with n3) for the interpretations of the Chinese 
name and a French translation of the passage from Yijing’s work; Lahiri 
(1986: 84–5) for an English translation of the same passage; Laskar (1906) 
for the best available edition of the Ashrafpur copper-plates; Majumdar 
(1924) and Ganguly (1941–42) on the interpretation of the date of these 
Khaḍga inscriptions.
92 See D.C. Bha tt acharya 1930 and Furui forthcoming.

--- [Page 42] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 322
must be situated in time after the absolute dates of those 
Vainyagupta charters.
In what follows, I will ﬁ rst present some contrastive obser-
vations on the two types of script mainly referring to the three 
inscriptions A. 1, A. 2, and A. 60 edited in this contribution. 
The script types of these specimens are shown here in a 
paleographic table ( ﬁ g. 10), where I have added for the sake 
of comparison the inscription of V īracandra (A. 55), which in 
Sircar’s chronology would date to 575–578 ce. The order of 
the columns in the table re ﬂ ects a presumptive chronological 
sequence from oldest on the left to youngest on the right. 
Whenever no speci ﬁ c occurrence is cited, the intended shape 
is included in the table.
A. 1 and A. 55: “Late Northeastern Br āhm ī”
Other examples of this general type include the bell inscrip-
tion A. 203, the copper-plate inscription A. 206 and the 
extremely damaged (and hence unpublished) inscription 
A. 38 engraved on the back of the S ūrya sculpture held in the 
Museum at Mrauk U.93
In most available specimens of this script-type, no distinc-
tion is made between the vocalizations au and o, the la tt er 
serving for both. Only in the copper-plate inscription A. 206 
do we see a clear distinction being made between au (ll. 7 and 
16) and o; the same inscription is also the only specimen of 
this type to maintain a clear distinction between ṣa, which 
has a round bulge at the bo tt om left, and sa, whose bulge 
is sharp-angled;94 in other specimens, no corresponding 
distinction seems to be made between ṣa and sa, the la tt er 
apparently serving for both, although the poor state of 
preservation of most specimens may have obliterated an 
93 For A. 203, see my edition in n23 above based on Luce and Pe Maung 
Tin 1934–56, Inscriptions of Burma , plate CCCLIIf; for A. 206, see edition and 
plates in Sircar 1967; for A. 38, see Inscriptions of Burma , plate CCCLIII and 
EFEO estampages n. 2153 and n. 2158.
94 Contrast, for instance, the occurrences of dharmm ābhilāṣāt in lines 15 
and 16 with reṅgādityad āso in l. 21.

--- [Page 43] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 323Figure 10  Palaeographic table for inscriptions A. 55, A. 1, A. 60 and A. 2.


--- [Page 44] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 324
Figure 10  Continued.

--- [Page 45] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 325
Figure 10  Continued.

--- [Page 46] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 326
Figure 10  Continued.

--- [Page 47] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 327
Figure 10  Continued.

--- [Page 48] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 328
Figure 10  Continued.

--- [Page 49] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 329
originally subtle di ﬀ erence.95 Occasional distinction of ba 
from va is att ested.
The shape of ha is consistently the archaic one, also 
observed e.g. in the sixth-century Kotalipada plate, roughly 
resembling the ak ṣara la and quite precisely shaped like the 
roman le tt er J, rather than being close in shape to bha.96 The 
akṣara ya is always “tripartite” with its left extremity turning 
either inward or outward.97 The shape of ṇa is consistently 
“open mouthed” (Dani 1986: 282).
The shape of vocalization ā is almost without exception 
that of a hook open toward the right placed on top of the 
akṣara, not recorded by Dani (1986) but well a tt ested in 
Bengal epigraphy, for instance, in the Kotalipada plate (con-
sistently) and in the plates of Vainyagupta (in alternation 
with other shapes). Very rarely, we ﬁ nd the shape that Dani 
has called “with tick to the right” (1986: 274).
Two shapes occur for the vocalization i.98 Besides the common 
simple type resembling that used in later periods (a small cres-
cent appended to the top left of the ak ṣara), a more elaborate 
type is seen in A. 1, lines 6, 8, and 17. It also occurs a few times 
in A. 38. The independent vowel sign °i is variable in shape, 
sometimes appearing to consist of a visarga-shaped colon before 
the hook-shape, sometimes after that same hook-shape, and 
sometimes seeming to lack any colon-shaped element.99 For 
95 Cf. Pargiter (1910: 194, 203) on the Faridpur plates: “The le tt ers ṣ and 
s are made alike, but are generally distinguished in that the loop is round 
in ṣ and triangular in s.” The distinction is not represented by Dani (1986: 
288–9).
96 This type does not seem to be represented in Dani (1986). On the Kot-
alipada plate, see Furui 2013: 93–4.
97 Cf. Pargiter 1910: 206–8. Furui (2013: 94) has rightly argued against 
treating the variation in the shapes of ya as an accurate palaeographic 
criterion.
98 These are precisely the two types illustrated by Dani (1986: 115) for the 
inscriptions of the North Indian ruler Ya śodharman.
99 Notably in °iti at the end of the bell inscription A. 203. See Barne tt ’s 
note in Johnston’s article, p. 382 n3: “The le tt er before ti is certainly i, 
though of an unusual type, resembling u.” The apparent absence of any 
colon-shaped element here may, however, be due to wear of the original 

--- [Page 50] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 330
vocalization ī, we ﬁ nd, besides the simple “curled up form” 
(Dani 1986: 275) always open to the left, also and more com-
monly a more complex shape, not represented by Dani (1986), 
which is formed by a wave ﬁ rst moving upwards, then turning 
downward and ﬁ nally slanting again in upward direction.
A. 2 and A. 60: “Siddham ātr̥kā”
In this script type, which is the one best known for Arakan 
from Ānandacandra’s praśasti A. 71, vocalizations o and au 
are clearly distinguished, and so are the ak ṣaras ṣa and sa. 
Conversely, no distinction between ba and va is att ested here, 
the la tt er serving for both.
For all of the ak ṣaras and vocalizations mentioned under the 
previous type, this second type shows very clearly di ﬀ erent 
and less archaic shapes. Here, the ak ṣaras bha and ha are often 
closely similar, and ya is consistently bipartite; ṇa is in this script 
type consistently “three-toothed” (Dani 1986: 282). Vocaliza-
tions ā, i, and ī also show their modern shapes familiar to 
anyone who can read Bengali or Devan āgarī script. The ak ṣara 
°i has here become the “late initial i of the north, in which two 
dots are above and a tailed one below” (Dani 1986: 274).
A distinctive feature of this script type is the frequent use 
of shorthand forms instead of transparent ak ṣara+vir āma 
combinations. While my table shows only cases of m*, other 
shorthand vowel-less consonants are found in A. 71.100 
Another noteworthy characteristic is the ornate ﬁ nal form of 
the ak ṣara ti, indicated in the table with an exclamation point; 
the same is observed in Bengal epigraphy in the Ashrafpur 
plate “B”, ll. 17 and 23.101 But this was already used in the 
script type of A. 1.
or an imperfection of the reproduction. An example in A. 144, l. 4 (Johnston 
1944: 383; Inscriptions of Burma , plate CCCLIIe) shows the colon postposed.
100 See for example k* in ll. 23, 25 and 33, apparently not di ﬀ erentiated in 
shape from t* ﬁ guring in ll. 18, 20, 26, 38, 45; n* occurs in ll. 22, 25, 36, 41, 
52, 53. Cf. Gutman 1976: 37.
101 See Laskar 1906.

--- [Page 51] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 331
A Chronological Paradox?
The upshot of the preceding discussion is that we are con-
fronted with two very clearly distinct script types. The ﬁ rst 
shows a number of similarities with Bengal inscriptions of 
the sixth century. Notably, the Dharmavijaya inscription 
A. 1 is much closer in script-type to the V īracandra inscrip-
tion A. 55, than to the specimens of the “Siddham ātr̥kā” type. 
The la tt er are unlikely to be earlier than the Ashrafpur inscrip-
tions of Samata ṭa, tentatively datable to the late seventh 
century. I suppose, on the contrary—although I cannot posi-
tively demonstrate it—that the Arakan specimens of the 
“Siddham ātr̥kā” type are younger than those from Ashraf-
pur, and a natural conclusion therefore would be to situate 
A. 2, A. 55, and A. 71, and hence the reign of Ānandacandra, 
in the eighth century at the earliest, without being able to 
exclude a date in the ninth. In palaeographic terms, the spec-
imens of the two respective types would seem to be separated 
by some 100 to 200 years.
The received chronology, however, situates the beginning 
of Dharmavijaya’s reign only 55 years before the beginning 
of that of Ānandacandra, while conventional historiography 
would situate the end of V īracandra’s reign 90 years before 
the beginning of that of Dharmavijaya and hence 145 years 
before the beginning Ānandacandra’s.102 While the distance 
in time between V īracandra and Ānandacandra, extrapolated 
from the king list in Ānandacandra’s praśasti, accords well 
with the palaeographic distance between A. 55 and A. 71, the 
palaeographic approach to dating Dharmavijaya’s inscrip-
tion A. 1 yields a result that seems to contradict the king list. 
How might we resolve this paradox?
Conclusions
If we choose to accept the data from the king list at face 
value, then Cribb’s observations cited above furnish a way 
102 I refer again to the overview provided in Mahlo 2012: 88.

--- [Page 52] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 332
out of the palaeographic conundrum: the apparently close 
connection betw een the writing styles of V īracandra’s and 
Dharmavijaya’s stone carvers may be due to conservatism 
on the part of the la tt er, while the apparently wide gap 
between those of Dharmavijaya’s and Ānandacandra’s stone 
carvers may be due to an abrupt modernization under in ﬂ u-
ence from Bengal. On the other hand, if we prioritize palae-
ographic analysis, then Henige’s cautionary remarks also 
cited above, along with my detection of traces of competition 
between lineages, provide an argument against relying on 
the king list: what is presented there as a succession of rulers 
may telescope into a single line what were in reality collat-
eral lines of competing ruling houses, while obliterating 
some historical ﬁ gures altogether. Since there is no objective 
way to choose between the two available interpretations of 
the data, I believe that the only reasonable position with 
regard to the problem of dating of the ﬁ rst-millennium 
inscriptions of Arakan, in the present state of knowledge, is 
to remain agnostic. This is one of the principal general con-
clusions of the present contribution.
The other general conclusion must be that comparison 
with Bengal is perhaps even more crucial for making pro-
gress in the study of early Arakan than was already realized 
by previous scholars. A variety of connections between cul-
tural practices have been exposed or hinted at throughout 
this article: shared use of speci ﬁ c script types, shared pecu-
liarities in documentation of endowments to religious institu-
tions, overlapping coinage traditions, etc. Anticipating a 
more detailed discussion of these issues in my planned mono-
graph on the Sanskrit inscriptions of Arakan, I would like to 
add to the mentioned indications of close cultural contact that 
the corollary of admi tt ing strong cultural in ﬂ uence from 
Bengal on Arakan is that specialists of early Bengal should 
also shed some of their inhibition when it comes to looking 
beyond the boundaries that de ﬁ ne modern-day “South Asia” 
and exclude Arakan. Thus, for instance, the coin term 
taṇḍaka—found several times in the vase-inscription of 
Devātideva, king of Harikela—has been ﬂ atly stated to be 

--- [Page 53] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 333
103 See G. Bha tt acharya (1996: 246 n24): “The term Taṇḍaka designating a 
coin is not to be found in any other record”.
104 See Ghosh 2012–13: 102.unique to early southeastern Bengal,103 whereas an a tt estation 
from Arakan was already published by Johnston in 1944, 
occurring as it does in the inscription A. 71, in stanza LII. 
A shared tradition of relevant terminology con ﬁ rms the close 
connection between coinage traditions of Harikela and 
Arakan.104
Besides these ﬁ ndings, this study of three more Sanskrit 
inscriptions of Arakan has yielded a likely candidate for the 
ancient name of Arakan, viz. K āmara ṅga. It has cast new light 
on the assumptions of previous scholarship with regard to 
the dominance of Mah āyāna Buddhism in Arakan in the ﬁ rst 
millennium. And it has allowed us to resurrect from near or 
total oblivion the ﬁ gure of king Dharmavijaya, as well as 
those of another king and his elder brother whose full names, 
we may hope, will be revealed by future discoveries.
I gratefully acknowledge the help I have received during the process of research for 
this article from Diwakar Acharya, Claudine Bau tz e-Picron, Véronique Degroot, 
Ryosuke Furui, Rolf Giebel, Pamela Gutman, Bob Hudson, Kyaw Minn Htin, Chris-
tian Lammerts, Jacques Leider, Rajat Sanyal, Péter-Dániel Szántó, and Yuko Yokochi.
Arlo Griffiths  received his PhD in Sanskrit from Leiden University. After holding 
a position as lecturer in Indian Religions at the University of Groningen, and holding 
the chair of Sanskrit at Leiden University, he joined the French School of Asian 
Studies (EFEO) in 2008 as professor of Southeast Asian history. His main ﬁ elds of 
interest are Hindu and Buddhist religious/ritual literature in Sanskrit on the one 
hand, and inscriptions of South and Southeast Asia in Sanskrit and vernacular lan-
guages, on the other. He was posted at the EFEO’s Jakarta Centre 2009–14, and now 
teaches in Paris and Lyon. He contributed an article co-authored with Amandine 
Lepoutre in the Journal of Burma Studies  17.2 (2013). Other signi ﬁ cant recent publi-
cations include From La ṅkā Eastwards: the R āmāyaṇa in the literature and visual arts of 
Indonesia  (Leiden, 2011), co-edited with A. Acri & H. Creese, and The inscriptions of 
Camp ā at the Museum of Cham sculpture in Đà Nẵng (Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi, 
2012), co-authored with A. Lepoutre, W.A. Southworth and Thành Ph ần. He can be 
reached at arlo.gri ﬃ  ths@efeo.net.
Bibliography
Barne tt , Lionel D. 1925–26. “The Mungir Plate of Devapaladeva: 
Samvat 33.” Epigraphia Indica  18: 304–7.

--- [Page 54] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 334
____. 1926–27. “Six Inscriptions from Kolur and Devagiri.” Epi-
graphia Indica  19: 179–97.
Bhatt acharya, Gouriswar. 1993. “ An Inscribed Metal Vase Most 
Probably from Chi tt agong, Bangladesh.” In South Asian 
Archaeology 1991: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Con-
ference of the Association of South Asian Archaeologists in Western 
Europe, Held in Berlin, 1–5 July 1991 , edited by Adelbert J. Gail 
and Gerd J.R. Mevissen, 323–38. Stu tt gart: F. Steiner.
____. 1996. “ A Preliminary Report on the Inscribed Metal Vase 
from the National Museum of Bangladesh.” In Explorations in 
Art and Archaeology of South Asia: Essays Dedicated to N.G. 
Majumdar , edited by Debala Mitra, 237–47. Calcu tt a: Director-
ate of Archaeology and Museums, Government of West 
Bengal.
Bhatt acharyya, Dinesh Chandra. 1930. “ A Newly Discovered Cop-
perplate from Tippera [The Gunaighar Grant of Vainyagupta: 
The Year 188 Current (Gupta Era)].” Indian Historical Quarterly  
6: 45–60.
Chakravarti, Adhir. 1998. “ Andaman and Nicobar: Early History.” 
In India and South-East Asia Socio-Econo-Cultural Contacts , 
edited by N.N. Bha tt acharyya, 517–39. Calcu tt a: Punthi 
Pustak.
Chavannes, Édouard. 1894. Mémoire composé à l’époque de la grande 
dynastie T’ang sur les religieux éminents qui allèrent chercher la loi 
dans les pays d’Occident . Paris: E. Leroux.
Chhabra, B.Ch. 1965. Expansion of Indo-Aryan Culture during Pallava 
Rule (as Evidenced by Inscriptions) . Delhi: Munshi Ram Manohar 
Lal.
Cousins, L. 2003. “ Sākiyabhikkhu/Sakyabhikkhu/ Śākyabhik ṣu: A Mis-
taken Link to the Mah āyāna?” Nagoya Studies in Indian Culture 
and Buddhism: Sa ṃbhāṣā 23: 1–27.
Cribb, Joe. 1986. “Dating South East Asia’s Earliest Coins.” In Dey-
adharma: Studies in Memory of Dr. D.C. Sircar , edited by 
Gouriswar Bha tt acharya, 111–27. Sri Garib Dass Oriental 
Series 33. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Dani, Ahmad Hasan. 1986. Indian Palaeography . 2nd edition. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Das Gupta, Charu Chandra. 1931. “Some Notes on the Ādi-Bhañjas 
of Khijji ṅga Ko ṭṭa, Earlier Bhañjas of Khiñjali-Ma ṇḍala, Bhañjas 
of Bauda and Later Bhañjas of Khiñjali.” Annals of the Bhan-
darkar Oriental Research Institute  12 (3): 231–45.

--- [Page 55] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 335
Delhey, Martin. 2012. “The Textual Sources of the Mañju śriyam ūlakalpa  
(Mañju śrīmūlakalpa ), With Special Reference to Its Early Nep-
alese Witness NMGPP A39/4.” Journal of the Nepal Research 
Centre  14: 55–75.
Derre tt , J. Duncan M. 1983. A Textbook for Novices: Jayarak ṣita’s 
« Perspicuous Commentary on the Compendium of Conduct by 
Śrîghana ». Pubblicazioni di « Indologica Taurinensia » 15. 
Torino: Edizioni Jollygra ﬁ ca.
Duroiselle, C. 1921. A List of Inscriptions Found in Burma . Rangoon: 
Superintendent, Government Printing, Burma.
Edgerton, Franklin. 1953. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dic-
tionary . 2 vols. William Dwight Whitney Linguistic Series. 
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Frasch, Tilman. 2002. “Coastal Peripheries during the Pagan Period.” 
In The Maritime Frontier of Burma: Exploring Political, Cultural, 
and Commercial Interaction in the Indian Ocean World, 1200–
1800 , edited by Jos Gommans and Jacques Leider, 59–78. 
Amsterdam: Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Weten-
schappen; Leiden: KITLV Press.
Furui, Ryosuke. 2013. “The Kotalipada Copperplate Inscription of 
the Time of Dv ādaśāditya, Year 14.” Pratna Samiksha , New 
Series 4: 89–98.
____. Forthcoming. “ Ājīvikas, Ma ṇibhadra and Early History of 
Eastern Bengal: A New Copper Plate Inscription of Vain-
yagupta and Its Implications. ” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society .
Ganguly, D.C. 1941–42. “Date of Ashrafpur Plate.” Epigraphia Indica  
26 (appeared 1952): 125–6.
Gerschheimer, Gerdi. 2003–04. “Le Corpus des inscriptions 
khmères.” Bulletin de l’Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient  90–1: 
478–82.
Ghosh, Suchandra. 2011. “The Trans Meghna Region: Making of a 
Sub-Regional Identity.” Journal of Ancient Indian History  27: 
220–31.
____. 2012–13. “Use of Coin Terms in the Epigraphs of Early Medi-
eval Bengal and Related Issues.” Numismatic Digest: Journal of 
Indian Institute of Research in Numismatic Studies  36–7: 94–112.
Griﬃ  ths, Arlo. 2013. “The Problem of the Ancient Name Java and 
the Role of Satyavarman in Southeast Asian International Rela-
tions around the Turn of the Ninth Century CE.” Archipel  85: 
43–81.

--- [Page 56] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 336
Griﬃ  ths, Arlo and D. Christian Lammerts. 2015. “Epigraphy: 
Southeast Asia.” Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism , vol. I, 988–
1009. Leiden: Brill.
Griﬃ  ths, Arlo, Amandine Lepoutre, William A. Southworth, and 
Thành Ph ần. 2008–09. “Études du corpus des inscriptions du 
Camp ā, III. Épigraphie du Camp ā 2009–2010: prospection sur 
le terrain, production d’estampages, supplément à l’inventaire.” 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  95–6: 435–97.
Gutman, Pamela. 1976. “ Ancient Arakan: With Special Reference to 
Its Cultural History between the 5th and 11th Centuries.” PhD 
diss., Australian National University.
____. 1998. “ A Series of Buddhist Reliefs from Selagiri.” In Études 
birmanes en hommage à Denise Bernot , edited by Pierre Pichard, 
François Robinne, Bénédicte Brac de la Perrière, Sylvie 
Pasquet, and Catherine Raymond, 103–11. Études théma-
tiques 9. Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
____. 2001. “The Martaban Trade: An Examination of the Literature 
from the Seventh Century until the Eighteenth Century.” 
Asian Perspectives  40 (1): 108–18.
Henige, David P. 1975. “Some Phantom Dynasties of Early and 
Medieval India: Epigraphic Evidence and the Abhorrence of 
a Vacuum.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies  
38 (3): 525–49.
Hinüber, Oskar von. 2006. “Everyday Life in an Ancient Indian 
Buddhist Monastery.” Annual Report of the International 
Research Institute for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 9: 
3–31.
Jayaswal, K.P. 1934. An Imperial History of India in a Sanskrit Text 
[with a Special Commentary on Later Gupta Period c. 700 B.C. –
c. 770 A.D.] . Lahore: Motilal Banarsidass.
Johnston, E.H. 1944. “Some Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan.” Bul-
letin of the School of Oriental and African Studies  11 (2): 357–85.
Kathotia, Indrakumar. 2006. “Coins of the Ākara Dynasty of Early 
Medieval Bengal.” In Mudr ānuśīlana: Articles of the Seminar on 
Coins of Bengal and North-East India , edited by Samaresh Ban-
dyopadhyay, 60–77. Kolkata: The Asiatic Society.
Kern, Hendrik, ed. 1864 –65. The B ṛhat Sañhitá of Varáhamihira . Bib-
liotheca Indica, New Series, 51, 54, 59, 63, 68, 72–3. Calcu tt a: 
Asiatic Society of Bengal.
Kudo, Noriyuko. 2004. “Remarks on the Orthography of the 
Kāśyapaparivarta Manuscripts: ‘Visarga-Da ṇḍa’ in Verses.” In 

--- [Page 57] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 337
Three Mountains and Seven Rivers: Prof. Musashi Tachikawa’s 
Felicitation Volume , edited by Shoun Hino and Toshihiro 
Wada, 73–95. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.
Kyaw Minn Htin. 2011. “Early Buddhism in Myanmar: Ye Dhamm ā 
Inscriptions from Arakan.” In Early Interactions between South 
and Southeast Asia: Re ﬂ ections on Cross-Cultural Exchange , 
edited by Pierre-Yves Manguin, A. Mani, and Geo ﬀ  Wade, 
385–406. Nalanda-Sriwijaya Series 2. Singapore; New Delhi: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies; Manohar India.
Kyaw Minn Htin and Jacques Leider. Forthcoming. “The Epigraphic 
Archive of Arakan/Rakhine (Myanmar): A Survey.” To appear 
in a volume edited by Daniel Perret. Paris: École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Lahiri, Latika. 1986. Chinese Monks in India: Biography of Eminent 
Monks Who Went to the Western World in Search of the Law during 
the Great T’ang Dynasty . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Laskar, Ganga Mohan. 1906. “ Ashrafpur Copper-Plate Grants of 
Devakha ḍga.” Memoirs of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal  1 
(6): 85–91.
Lévi, Sylvain. 1923. “Pré-Aryen et Pré-Dravidien dans l’Inde.” 
Journal Asiatique  203: 1–57.
____. 1929. “Pre-Aryan and Pre-Dravidian in India.” In Pre-Aryan 
and Pre-Dravidian in India , by Sylvain Lévi, Jean Przyluski, and 
Jules Bloch, trans. Prabodh Chandra Bagchi, 61–126. Calcu tt a: 
University of Calcu tt a.
Lingat, Robert. 1937. “Vinaya et droit laïque: Etudes sur les 
conﬂ its de la loi religieuse et de la loi laïque dans l’Indochine 
hinayaniste.” Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  37: 
415–77.
Luce, G.H. 1985. Phases of Pre-Pagán Burma: Languages and History . 
2 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Luce, G.H. and Pe Maung Tin. 1934–56. Inscriptions of Burma . 5 vols. 
University of Rangoon Publication 6. Oxford and Rangoon: 
Oxford University Press, H. Milford.
Mahlo, Dietrich. 2012. The Early Coins of Myanmar/Burma: Messen-
gers from the Past – Pyu, Mon, and Candras of Arakan – ( ﬁ rst 
Millennium AD) . Translated by Karen Margolis. Bangkok: 
White Lotus Press.
Majumdar, R.C. 1924. “The Date of the Kha ḍga Dynasty of Bengal.” 
Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal N.S. 19: 
375–9.

--- [Page 58] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 338
____. 1937–38. Suvarnadvipa . 2 vols. Ancient Indian Colonies in the 
Far East 2. Calcu tt a: Modern Pub. Syndicate.
____. 1941–42. “Chi tt agong Copper-Plate of Kantideva.” Epigraphia 
Indica  26 (appeared 1952): 313–18.
Matsunaga, Y ūkei. 1985. “On the Date of the Mañju śrīmūlakalpa .” 
In Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R.A. Stein , edited by 
Michel Strickmann, vol. 3, 882–94. Mélanges Chinois et Boud-
dhiques 22. Bruxelles: Institut belge des hautes études chi-
noises.
Morrison, Barrie M. 1970. Political Centers and Cultural Regions in 
Early Bengal . Tucson: Published for the Association for Asian 
Studies by University of Arizona Press.
Morton, Julia F. 1987. Fruits of Warm Climates . Winterville, N.C.: 
Creative Resource Systems.
Mukherjee, B.N. 2003. “ A Survey of the Samatata and Harikela 
Coinages.” Journal of Bengal Art  8: 199–212.
Nyein Maung [ Ṅrimḥ Moṅ] et al. 1972–2013. Ancient Burmese Inscrip-
tions  [Rheḥ hoṅḥ mran m ā kyok c ā myāḥ]. 6 vols. Yangon.
Pargiter, F.E. 1910. “Three Copper-Plate Grants from East Bengal.” 
Indian Antiquary  39: 193–216.
Pe Maung Tin and G.H. Luce. 1963. “Inscriptions of Burma, Edited 
and Translated.” Bulletin of the Burma Historical Commission  3: 
59–142.
Perret, Daniel. 2009. “Barus: société et relations extérieures (XIIe-mi-
XVIIe s.).” In Histoire de Barus, Sumatra. III : Regards sur une 
place marchande de l’océan Indien (XIIe-milieu du XVIIe s.), edited 
by Daniel Perret and Heddy Surachman, 533–641. Cahier 
d’Archipel 38. Paris: Association Archipel, École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Rājā Rādhākānta Deva. 1825–57. Śabdakalpadruma ḥ. 5 vols. Calcu tt a. 
Reprint 1967, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Renou, Louis and Jean Filliozat. 1947–53. L’Inde classique : manuel 
des études indiennes . 2 vols. Paris; Hanoi.
Rhodes, Nicholas G. 2006. “ A Group of Coins of the Candra 
Dynasty of Arakan.” Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal  48: 
76–83.
Sandamuni Bhikkhu. 2003. “The Origin and Development of the 
Arakanese Scripts.” PhD diss., Kolkata: University of Cal-
cutt a.
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance 
of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period.” In Genesis and 

--- [Page 59] ---
Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan 339
Development of Tantrism , edited by Shingo Einoo, 41–349. Insti-
tute of Oriental Culture Special Series 23. Tokyo: Institute of 
Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.
San Tha Aung [Ca ṁ Sā Aoṅ]. 1974. ae d ī khrok r ā cu nha ṅ. yaṅḥ ma 
tuiṅ mī ra khui ṅ praññ su ṁḥ akkhar ā [The Arakanese script to the 
6th century A.D .]. Yangon: Umm ā aoṅ.
Schmiedchen, Anne tt e. 2010. “Religious Patronage and Political 
Power: The Ambivalent Character of Royal Donations in 
Sanskrit Epigraphy.” Journal of Ancient Indian History  27: 
154–66.
____. 2014. Herrschergenealogie und religiöses Patronat: die Inschriften-
kultur der R āṣṭrakūṭas, Śilāhāras und Y ādavas (8. bis 13. Jahrhun-
dert).  Gonda Indological Studies  17. Leiden: Brill.
Schopen, Gregory. 1979. “Mah āyāna in Indian Inscriptions.” Indo-
Iranian Journal  21: 1–19.
____. 1997. Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks: Collected Papers on the 
Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic Buddhism in India . 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
____. 2005. Figments and Fragments of Mah āyāna Buddhism in 
India: More Collected Papers . Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press.
Silk, Jonathan A. 2008. Managing Monks: Administrators and Admin-
istrative Roles in Indian Buddhist Monasticism . New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Sircar, D.C. 1957–58. “Inscriptions of the Chandras of Arakan.” 
Epigraphia Indica  32 (appeared 1962): 103–9.
____. 1965. Indian Epigraphy . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
____. 1967. “Fragmentary Copper-Plate Grant from Arakan.” Epi-
graphia Indica  37: 61–6.
____. 1973. Epigraphic Discoveries in East Pakistan . Calcu tt a: Sanskrit 
College.
____. 1976. “Indological Notes. 21: R.C. Majumdar’s Chronology of 
the P āla Kings. 22: Two Inscriptions from Prome and Vesali 
in Burma.” Journal of Ancient Indian History  9: 200–18.
Tripathy, Snigdha. 1974. Inscriptions of Orissa , Volume VI. Bhu-
baneswar: Superintendent of Museums.
Wackernagel, Jacob and Albert Debrunner. 1957. Altindische Gram-
matik. Band II, 1: Enleitung zur Wortlehre. Nominalkomposition . 
Gött ingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht.
Wheatley, Paul. 1956. “Langkasuka.” T’oung Pao , Second series, 44: 
387–412.

--- [Page 60] ---
 A RLO GRIFFITHS 340
____. 1961. The Golden Khersonese: Studies in the Historical Geography 
of the Malay Peninsula before A.D. 1500 . Kuala Lumpur: Uni-
versity of Malaya Press.
Wolters, O.W. 1967. Early Indonesian Commerce: A Study of the Origins 
of Śrīvijaya . Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.