--- [Page 1] ---
Daniel perreT (editor)
HISTORY OF PADANG LAWAS
NORTH SUMATRA
II
soCieTies  of padang  lawas
(Mid-ninTh – T hirTeenTh  CenTury  Ce)
Cahier d’Archipel 43
Paris 
2014


--- [Page 2] ---
Designed by Diah Novitasari
Front cover design by Ade Pristie Wahyo
Front and back cover photographs by Daniel Perret
Cahier d’Archipel 43    
   
 
© ASSOCIATION ARCHIPEL 2014
École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales
190-198, avenue de France
75013 ParisISSN. 0244-5301
ISBN. 978-2-910513-70-2

--- [Page 3] ---
Contents
Acknowledgments 9 
Introduction 11 
Daniel Perret
1. – T he sCulpTure  of padang  lawas : a n updaTed  invenTory  37 
Daniel Perret
2. – B uddhisT  iMages  froM  padang  lawas  region   107
and The souTh  asian ConneCTion  
Claudine Bautze-Picron
3. – T he padang  lawas  Makara s and Javano -suMaTran  relaTionships  in arT 129
Marijke J. Klokke
4. – f ive Bronzes  found  in padang  lawas  147 
Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer
5. – a BouT  anCienT  MusiCal  insTruMenTs   159
depiCTed  in padang  lawas  (n orTh  suMaTra )
Dana Rappoport
6. – s eTTleMenTs  assoCiaTed  wiTh  padang  lawas  Biaro s: 171
a sTudy  of Biaro s nagasariBu  and Mangaledang
Sukawati Susetyo
7. – a rChaeologiCal  reMains  displaying  indian  CulTural  183
influenCe  in The region  of The BaTang  gadis 
and BaTang  angkola  rivers , M andailing  naTal  regenCy ,
norTh  suMaTra
Ery Soedewo

--- [Page 4] ---
8. – i nsCripTions  of suMaTra . iii. T he padang  lawas  Corpus   211
sTudied  along  wiTh  insCripTions   froM  sorik  Merapi  (n orTh  suMaTra ) 
and froM  Muara  Takus  (r iau) 
Arlo Grifiths
9. – T he angkola -Mandailing  sCripT : a hisToriCal  perspeCTive  255
Uli Kozok
10. – s oCieTies  of padang  lawas  283
(M id-ninTh – e nd of ThirTeenTh  CenTury  Ce)
Daniel Perret
the authors 373
Abstracts 375
Abbreviations &References 379
Index 411

--- [Page 5] ---
31Introduction
MusiBatang HariRokanBarumun Sibolga
Lumut
Simangambat
Padang NunangBiaro ManggisLabuhanbilik
Bagan SiapiapiMedan
Tanah
 DatarPekanbaru
MuaraTakus
Padang RocoTanjungmedan
IndrapuraMuara SipongiKota Cina
SingkelPasaiNeusu Aceh
Minye Tujuh
Sorik Merapi
Muara Jambi
BumiayuRejang LebongSolok SipinKoto KandisTarutungBarusKedah
strait
of
Malacca
Indian
oceanPadang Lawas
(map 2)
Palembang
0                   200 km
Map 1. Main place names in Sumatra mentioned in this volume

--- [Page 6] ---
32Daniel Perret
1
234
5678910
11 Si Pamutung
1213141516
171819
20
21
2223
24
252627282930
3132331819mDk. Sibualbuali
1886mDk. LubukrayaDk. Tampulonanjing
2009m
Dk. Na Birong
1925m
0 40 kmPADANGSIDEMPUAN
SIBUHUANGUNUNGTUABt. Pane
A. Sirumambe
Bt. Sihapas
Bt. AngkolaA. BarumunA. Barumun
A. BarumunBt. Pane
1. Bahal I, 2. Bahal II, 3. Bahal III, 4. Pulo, 5. Bara, 6. Mangaledang, 7. Haloban, 8. Tanjung Bangun, 
9. Aek Hayuara, 10. Sitopayan, 11. Si Pamutung, 12. Tandihat I, 13. Tandihat II, 14. Tandihat III, 
15. Aek Tunjang, 16. Batu Gana, 17. Nagasaribu, 18. Si Hoda-Hoda, 19. Sisoldop, 20. Sangkilon, 
21. Pagaranbira, 22. Porlak Dolok, 23. Gunungtua, 24. Padang Bujur, 25. Liang Abuan, 
26. Tanaman Anjing (Tandihat), 27. Aek Si Sangkap, 28. Lantosan, 29. Parsaramahan, 
30. Napagadung Laut, 31. Tandihat IV , 32. Pandraman, 33. Tanaman Anjing (Sitopayan)500 - 1000m1000 - 1500mabove 1500m
Map 2. Archaeological map of Padang Lawas (2D)

--- [Page 7] ---
33Introduction
 Map 3. Archaeological map of Padang Lawas (3D)

--- [Page 8] ---
8. INSCRIPTIONS OF SUMATRA III. 
THE PADANG LAWAS CORPUS STUDIED ALONG WITH 
INSCRIPTIONS FROM SORIK MERAPI (NORTH SUMATRA)
AND FROM MUARA TAKUS (RIAU)
Besides foreign reports on Sumatra contained 
mainly in Arabic and Chinese sources, very 
sparse references in South Indian inscriptions, 
and the irst reports in Javanese sources that 
begin only relatively late with the Deśavarṇana  
(formerly called Nāgarakr ̥tāgama), an East 
Javanese court poem of 1365 ce,1 the sole truly 
local sources we have for the ancient history of 
Northern Sumatra are epigraphical. In the total 
absence of other contemporary indigenous written 
documents, what little epigraphical evidence 
exists thus becomes of heightened importance for 
understanding the history of Padang Lawas. 
*      For the irst two instalments of this series, see Grifiths 
2011 and 2012. The present paper was written at the 
request of Daniel Perret, who has shown himself an 
inexhaustible source of information, photographs, 
and constructive criticism. In writing the paper, I 
have in addition sought and profited from the help 
of many other colleagues. It is a pleasant duty to 
acknowledge the support of Diwakar Acharya, Andrea 
Acri, Gouriswar Bhattacharya, Thomas Cruijsen, 
Ronald Davidson, J.C. Eade, Emmanuel Francis, Rolf 
Giebel, Valérie Gillet, Harunaga Isaacson, Christian 
Lammerts, Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer, Iain Sinclair, 
Y . Subbarayulu, Uri Tadmor, Gerda Theuns, and 
Vincent Tournier.
1 Edition by Pigeaud (1960); translation by Robson 
(1995).arlo griffiThs *
I. INTRODUCTION
Previous studies have shown, for instance, that 
the inscriptions inform us about the ethnolinguistic 
situation in ancient Northern Sumatra, especially 
the languages that were in use and the systems 
of writing used for them. It is also known that 
they inform us about religious affairs, such 
as the situation and nature of local Buddhism 
and its relationship with possible presence of 
non-Buddhist religious practices. Some of the 
inscriptions are dated, and they provide the 
basic chronological framework for historical and 
archaeological investigations.2
Although previous epigraphical work — both 
from the colonial period and after Indonesian 
independence — is not lacking, there are 
signiicant problems from the points of view of 
exhaustiveness, reliability and accessibility3 of 
2 The results of previous studies on such topics are 
conveniently summarized in Perret et al. 2007.
3 Publications from the colonial period are often in 
Dutch, which means they are nowadays inaccessible to 
the majority of scholars in and outside of Indonesia. 
The results of archaeological research in independent 
Indonesia “are generally presented in local seminars 
and in-house publications” (Creese 2001: 16) and do 
not become known beyond a very limited circle of 
scholars active in Indonesia. The seminal publications 
by Louis-Charles Damais, who wrote in French, are 

--- [Page 9] ---
212Arlo Grifiths
these epigraphical publications. The primary 
aim of this contribution is therefore to provide a 
reliable, controllable and complete corpus of the 
inscriptions of Padang Lawas, for a readership 
not limited to those scholars who can read 
Dutch, French and Indonesian. The secondary 
aim is both to re-evaluate existing perceptions 
of the political, religious, ethnic, linguistic and 
general cultural-historical background of the 
antiquities of Padang Lawas in the light of the 
epigraphical data, and to add new perspectives 
from documents previously not (or not properly) 
published. To this second purpose, I also include 
here the inscriptions of the neighboring Buddhist 
sites of Sorik Merapi (also in North Sumatra) and 
of Muara Takus (in Riau), which throw signiicant 
light on those from Padang Lawas, and are, in 
turn, illuminated by them.4 The maps on p. 31–3  
inaccessible to most Indonesian scholars (except the 
few which have appeared in translations into English 
or Indonesian).
4 The justiication for including the inscriptions of 
Sorik Merapi, despite the fact that they might appear 
at irst sight to be rather different from any Padang 
Lawas inscriptions, follows from the likelihood of 
ancient trade connections. See Rumbi Mulia (1980: 
29): “Possibly the old east-west trade route ran through 
Siabu, Sorik Merapi to the Padang Lawas region”; see 
also Bosch (1930: 147 n. 1): “Naar de heer Coolhaas 
ons mededeelde, heeft volgens de volksoverlevering 
de verbinding van de Westkust naar de Oostkust door 
de Padang Lawas via Siaboe geloopen. Als aan dit 
bericht vertrouwen mag worden geschonken, hebben 
waarschijnlijk de in de Padang Lawas gevestigde 
Buddhisten zich in de 14de eeuw door het lengtedal 
tusschen het tegenwoordige Padang Sidempoean en 
Kota Nopan in Zuidelijke richting verplaatst en op de 
ten Westen van Kota Nopan gelegen Sorik Merapi de 
sporen van hun aanwezigheid in den vorm van de in 
de inscripties vermelde caitya’s achtergelaten.” The 
inscriptions of Muara Takus are very similar to some 
of Padang Lawas, and evidently are the product of 
closely related religious practices. See also Schnitger, 
(1936: 40, point 4): “Blijkens de inscriptie van Aek 
Sangkilon, dateeren de temples van Padang Lawas uit 
ongeveer denzelfden tijd als die van Moera Takoes. 
De veronderstelling ligt dus voor de hand, dat beide 
gebieden met elkaar in relatie hebben gestaan en dat 
een eventuele verbindingsweg via Pasir Pengarajan en shows the geographical distribution of the ind-
spots of most of the inscriptions to be treated here.
The core of this study consists of a corpus of 
inscriptions of the sites of Padang Lawas, plus 
those of the individual sites Sorik Merapi and 
Muara Takus. This corpus will form the basis in 
the concluding part III for a synthetic discussion 
of a number of historical issues. But before turning 
to the presentation of the corpus, I must address 
a few methodological points and questions of 
deinition.
The irst is the chronological delimitation of 
the corpus. This study is limited to the written 
documents on imperishable materials — i.e. 
inscriptions — of the period that scholars of 
ancient Indonesia commonly refer to as ‘classical’, 
by which is meant the ‘Indianized’ or ‘pre-Islamic’ 
period of Indonesian history. Since the arrival and 
rise to dominance of Islam is only partly a useful 
criterion for deining the end of this period, and 
is entirely unhelpful for certain areas, a practical 
chronological cut-off point for the ‘classical’ 
period is 1500 ce.5 Inscriptions from Padang 
Lawas in Batak language and script, belonging to 
a different era of cultural history, are treated in Uli 
Kozok’s contribution to this volume.
It is not feasible, in the case of the present 
contribution, to discuss and justify the details of the 
decipherment of every letter of every inscription 
under discussion. The gap to be bridged between 
the specialized knowledge, which an epigraphist 
brings to bear on the original documents, and the 
kind of data his colleagues in other domains may 
be able to utilize, is indeed a very wide one. There 
is the Scylla of total non-transparency about the 
reasons why certain choices were made, or about 
the frequent circumstance that a good reason 
to make one choice or another is not readily 
available; and opposite this is the Charybdis of 
total transparency, every decision and uncertainty 
being laid bear, but leaving the reader drowning in 
Rokan zal hebben geloopen. […]”. See furthermore 
Andaya 2002: 377.
5 The periodization and terminology are typically used 
without any justiication (see e.g. Miksic 2004: 234–
236) but are, in my opinion, in need of reconsideration.

--- [Page 10] ---
213Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
discussion about the philological process, rather 
than facilitating his access to the actual contents 
of the documents. 
As epigraphist, I have indeed had to make 
numerous choices in the broad spectrum lying 
between the transliteration of individual signs, 
requiring a suficient knowledge of ancient 
writing in Indonesia, and the interpretation of 
the transliterated text, requiring knowledge of 
the ancient languages and the cultural world 
in which the texts were composed. Realizing 
that such knowledge is rare, I have attempted to 
serve a wider readership in part III of this study 
with a summary of the results of my study of the 
epigraphical corpus. In part II, I have striven to lay 
bear some of the most signiicant problems and 
choices, while following standard epigraphical 
practice in presupposing a signiicant amount 
of basic knowledge on the part of those readers 
who wish to follow the philological arguments, 
so that elementary facts need not be dealt with. I 
have tried my best to trace all inscriptions treated 
here, to (re)read them directly from the originals 
and to obtain the best possible reproductions to be 
published here, in order to allow specialist readers 
to control my results. But it remains a signiicant 
problem in the study of these inscriptions that 
usable reproductions are not available for all of 
them, and that some inscriptions once known to 
have existed are now no longer recoverable in 
original, or can be accessed only in conditions 
which do not allow veriication of published 
readings.
I would next like to call attention here to the 
terminological problem posed by the naming 
of ancient scripts of the Indic type. The naming 
of ancient scripts in South and Southeast Asia 
normally proceeds from the present, backwards 
in time. Modern regional scripts are named after 
the vernacular languages for which they are used 
(cf. Balinese, Batak, Bengali, Javanese, Khmer, 
Tamil). These terms are then projected backwards 
in time, until it can no longer be pretended that 
an ancient script stands clearly in the ancestry of 
only one, and not more than one modern script. 
If an ancient script name is known (e.g. brāhmī), then this name is used. While the predominant 
ancient writing system in use in Padang Lawas 
is presumably an ancestor of Batak script, it 
does not show yet any of the most remarkable 
characteristics of that script. It certainly is not 
the ancestor of modern Javanese script. For these 
reasons, both the denominations ‘Old Batak’ and 
‘Old Javanese’ — the latter often used in the 
secondary literature — must be ruled out; nor 
do we know what the ancient scribes called their 
script, so that we cannot use an indigenous name. 
It seems that the development of Indic writing in 
Sumatra and Java moved in parallel throughout 
the irst millennium, and that no distinctions are 
discernible before we enter the second. Although 
a systematic palaeographic study still needs to be 
undertaken to deine what distinguishes ancient 
forms of writing in Sumatra from ancient writing 
in Java, and when these distinctions came about, 
it seems that the inscriptions of Padang Lawas 
are a primary witness to the birth of speciically 
Sumatran scripts. I shall therefore use the term 
‘Palaeosumatran’ (originally coined by Louis-
Charles Damais), which indicates not merely 
that a given document was found in Sumatra, but 
implies that its script shows certain morphological 
characteristics found in other regions of Sumatra 
but not shared with writing in other parts of the 
archipelago, e.g. in Java and Bali.6
The corpus is subdivided geographically, 
separating the inscriptions of Padang Lawas7 
from those found at Sorik Merapi and Muara 
Takus. The Padang Lawas inscriptions are 
further subdivided on the basis of typology of 
the inscribed texts. Each entry starts with an 
6 See Grifiths 2011: 155 (with n. 28) for a brief 
discussion of the same terminological issue, and some 
further references, to which I would like to add now 
Damais 1952: 44–45.  See the section §1.5.2 “Problems 
of standardization and nomenclature of scripts” in 
Salomon 2003: 73–74 for the Indian background of the 
problem of naming scripts. See Sander 2007 for a more 
detailed discussion of the same issue.
7 Although a variety of different names has igured in 
previous publications on this material, I follow here 
the nomenclature of the Padang Lawas sites introduced 
elsewhere in the volume (p. 29).

--- [Page 11] ---
214Arlo Grifiths
overview of basic metadata including extensive 
— but not necessarily exhaustive — references 
to previous publications having dealt with, or 
at least mentioned, the given inscription. This 
overview is followed each time by the critically 
edited text and translation of the inscription, 
plus commentary. In editing the texts, I do or do 
not report existing variant readings, depending 
on the merits of the case. I adopt the following 
conventions:
Editorial signs and conventions
Indications of line numbers appear in parentheses 
and in bold face.
Readings that are merely mechanical  renderings 
of what I think I see on the inscription are 
printed in italics.
(…): parentheses enclose graphic elements whose 
reading is visually uncertain but philologically 
probable, while in case of impossibility to 
choose, ( a/o) represents what might be read a 
as well as o.
[…]: square brackets mark graphic elements 
wholly lost or wholly  unreadable on the 
inscription but restorable on the basis of philo-
logical considerations. 
{n}: curly braces enclose an approximate number 
of n lost akṣaras.
Signs used in translation
[…]: square brackets mark elements supplied, 
without correspondent in the original, but necessary to satisfy the requirements of English 
syntax.
(…): parentheses contain explanatory additions or 
reminders intended to facilitate comprehension 
of the text.
Transliteration and normalization
The transliteration used in this contribution 
adheres strictly to international norms for the 
transliteration of Indic script types (cf. Acri & 
Grifiths 2014). This means that I use v (not w) 
and that anusvāra/cecak  is ṁ irrespective of 
its pronunciation. The only additions to the 
internationally standard repertoire of signs are 
the raised circle (°) which precedes ‘independent 
vowels’ (namely vowels which form a separate 
akṣara) and the median dot (·) which represents 
virāma/paten. 
Lack of a standardized orthography is a 
common feature of all vernacular epigraphical 
traditions of South and Southeast Asia, and 
the inscriptions of Northern Sumatra are no 
exception. In order to signal explicitly the use of 
a short vowel for expected long, I sometimes use 
the breve sign (e.g. ă is short a for expected ā). 
In my translations and commentary, I standardize 
the spelling of words and names of Sanskrit 
origin according to the norms of Sanskrit; local 
words and names are represented, depending on 
the context, according to the norms of modern 
Indonesian spelling, or in simpliied transcription. 

--- [Page 12] ---
215Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
II. CORPUS
1. Padang Lawas
1.1. Foundation and donation inscriptions
1.1.1: The Paṇai inscription (ig. 1a, 1b, 1c)
Also known as: Prasasti Batu Gana (I), based on a wrong 
reading. 
Dimensions: h. 81, max. circumference 124, min. circum-
ference 89 cm.
Material: a very soft kind of whitish stone.
Provenance: One of the Bahal monuments (Biaro Bahal I, II 
or III) or Biaro Si Topayan.8
Present location: Museum Negeri Provinsi Sumatra Utara, 
no. 2186.
Language/Script: Old Malay in Palaeosumatran script.
Date: ca 11th century ce.
Publication history: described in Hasanuddin et al. 1994/95: 
53; edited with eye-copy by Rita M.S. & Sri Hartini 
2002: 5–7; edited with different readings in Rita M.S. et 
al. 2003: no. 3, p. 6–7; previous publications summarized 
by Perret et al. 2007: 55; inventoried PPS-SBU 11, p. 99.
Available reproductions: EFEO estampages n. 1856 and 
1857.
This edition: based on inspection of the stone and of the 
estampages.
Text and translation
(1) {...}la na°ik· data(ṁ)
(2)  {...} yaṁ di (da)laṁ savaḥ na°ik· 
(3) {...}· ka buk(i)t· (pa/sa)saran· ma(n)da-
(4) {...}n· turun· manapak· °a-
(5) [lur·] (s)uṅai {1}ṅa9 para(y)unan· (m)aṁhilir a -
8 Published statements on the provenance conlict with 
indications received by Daniel Perret from informants 
in the ield. I accept here his advice (personal 
communication, April 2012) to remain prudent by not 
excluding any of the four mentioned possibilities.
9 Here and in the lines below, a crack in the stone causes 
the false impression of greater loss of akṣaras than 
actually seems to have taken place, and the estampage 
shows an even greater gap than does the stone itself. 
That very few akṣaras were actually lost around this 
crack is suggested especially by the juncture falling (6) (ka)n· na°i(k)· batu tanam· yaṁ di padaṁ
(7) (ṅaś)i (suṅai) marlampa ma(ṁ)hilir·
(8) {1?} (tu/bhu) kami (da)ṅan· pramana bhumi  
paṅka nadi yaṁ °a-
(9) (da) {1} mali(ṅa) kuṭi haj(i) (n/d)(a/i)(r)i 
mañusuk· bhumi °inan· mulari
(10) par(ba){1}n dari kabayan· (p)unya kuṭi hi-
(na)n· kuṭi haji bava bvat·10 paṇai samuha
‘(1) ... mount, come, ... (2) which is in the wet 
rice-ield, mount ... (3) to  the hill as target ... (4) 
descend to follow the course (5) of the river ... 
go downstream (6) in order to mount the planted 
stone which is in the plains (7) .... of the river 
... go downstream ... (8) ... with the dimensions 
of the land Paṅka Nadī (‘River Mud’) which ... 
(9) ... the King’s Chamber ... to delimit that land11 
... (10) ... from the head-man12 who owns that 
Chamber , the King’s Chamber, bearing (it?) for 
the whole of Paṇai.’
Commentary
Unfortunately the stone is of poor quality and 
has lost substantial parts of the inscribed surface, 
so that we can only salvage disconnected phrases 
and cannot know for certain the principal purpose 
of the inscription. What is clear, at least, is that 
this document yields the irst local attestation of 
the ancient name of Padang Lawas, Paṇai, thus 
far only attested in external sources such as the 
Deśavarṇana  (13.1) and in the eulogistic part of 
within na°i//(k) · in line 6, where more akṣaras are not 
desired.
10 bava bvat : this possibly has to be read or corrected as 
bar·bvat.
11 The phrase mañusuk bhumi  clearly corresponds to the 
ubiquitous expression manusuk sīma ‘to delimit the 
boundaries of a freehold’ of Javanese land grants, and 
the Sundanese phrase ya nu ñusuk na pakvan  ‘he is 
the one who delimited the [territory of] Pakwan’ in the 
Batu Tulis of Bogor (see Hasan Djafar 2011: 5).
12 See Aichele 1987 on the problematic word kabayan.

--- [Page 13] ---
216Arlo Grifiths
the inscriptions of Rājendracōḷa in South India.13 
It mentions at least twice the kuṭi haji , i.e. the 
‘King’s kuṭi’. 
It is clear from the Deśavarṇana  and epigraphi-
cal Javanese sources that the kuṭi was some 
kind of religious institution or monument (van 
Naerssen 1937: 452–455), mostly — although 
not exclusively — Buddhist.14 Stuart Robson 
(1995) translates the word as ‘monastery’. It must 
however be stressed that kuṭī normally does not 
have that meaning when it occurs in sources from 
other parts of Buddhist Asia, and the Deśavarṇana  
indeed differentiates kuṭi from the usual word for 
13 Cf. Cœdès (1918: 4, 9). The presentation in Karashima 
& Subbarayalu (2009: 279–280) suggests that the 
passage mentioning Paṉṉai (i.e. Paṇai) igures only 
in one inscription, but in fact it is part of the standard 
eulogy of Rājendracōḷa, from his 13th or 14th regnal 
year onwards (Nilakantha Sastri 1955: 211 and note 
86), and is hence found identically in many inscriptions. 
The orthography Paṇṇai is also attested (e.g. South 
Indian Inscriptions , vol. IV , no. 828, line 9).
14 See especially Deśavarṇana  17.10, where a kuṭi haji  
i g ures among other kuṭis; the kuṭi haji  igures again in 
76.3. The term invites comparison with the compound 
rā ja kuṭī  ‘king’s kuṭī’ in two separate stanzas that occur 
repeatedly in two groups of Cambodian inscriptions. The 
irst is found as part of a list of temple personnel: dvau 
le kha kau rājakuṭīpālau pustakarakṣiṇau tāmbūlikau ca 
pā  nī yahārau ṣaṭ pattrakārakāḥ  (inscription K. 279, st. 
XCVIII [restored here by Cœdès on the basis of parallel 
texts, this part of the inscription actually being lost]; K. 
290, st. XCVI; K. 701, st. XCVIII; K. 1228, st. XCIII 
[not yet published]). This was translated by Cœdès 
(1908: 223): “deux scribes, deux gardiens de la kuṭī 
royale, deux gardes des manuscrits, deux fournisseurs 
de bétel, deux porteurs d’eau, six pattra  kāras ”. The 
same list is given for all religious denominations (not 
only Buddhist) that were important in Cambodia at the 
time, and the term rājakuṭī  certainly had no special 
connection with Buddhism here. The other stanza 
occurs in all the so-called digraphic inscriptions issued 
in the late ninth century ce by king Yaśovarman to 
record the foundation of institutions called āśrama (cf. 
Estève & Soutif 2010–11). The stanza is found e.g. as K. 
95, st. XXXIX: rājakuṭyantare rājadvijātinr ̥pasūnavaḥ 
vi śe    yur atra nirddoṣan ta evābharaṇānvitāḥ  ‘Only the 
king, Brahmins and the king’s sons may enter here 
unpunished within the king’s kuṭī wearing ornaments’. 
It appears that the king's kuṭī was a particular building 
or area within each āśrama .monastery, vihāra , in stanza 75.2. I tentatively 
propose the hypothesis that it may have been used 
as an abbreviation of the term gandhakuṭī , literally 
meaning ‘perfume chamber’, which was a private 
chamber reserved for the Buddha in monasteries 
in India. This term has been studied in some detail 
by Gregory Schopen (1990), from whose study it 
emerges clearly how very wide spread the term 
is in Indian Buddhist epigraphy. It is therefore 
striking that not a single case seems to occur in the 
epigraphical corpora of Cambodia and Campā, 
and that there seem to be only two in Indonesian 
epigraphy. One is found in a late East Javanese 
copy of a grant dated to 1042 ce, now in fact 
generally denoted as ‘Gandhakuṭi inscription’, 
dealing with a grant of land to a Buddhist 
monument ( dharma ) itself called Gandhakuṭi;15 
and the second in an incomplete set of copper 
plates, probably roughly contemporary with the 
Gandhakuṭi inscription, where we ind mention 
both of a gandhakoṭi i vimalāśramavihāra  ‘the 
gandhakuṭī  of the Vimalāśrama Monastery’ and 
a saṅ hyaṅ kuṭi i vimalāśrama  ‘the venerable kuṭi 
of Vimalāśrama’.16 This evidence indeed gives 
reason to suppose that the term kuṭi was used 
as equivalent to gandhakuṭī , and hence it may 
have come to denote the vihāra  as a whole.17 
We learn from Schopen’s article that in India, 
“these  Gandhakuṭī could be individually named 
15 The inscription has been edited in Brandes 1913: 141–
143, no. LXIII and in Boechari 1985–86: 72–75. See 
plate IIb, line 3.
16 See Brandes 1913: 243–247, no. CXII, 16a and 11b. 
For an overview of the collections where constituent 
plates of this inscription are held, and an overview of 
the relevant publications, see van Naerssen 1938: 501–
508. It is impossible to follow van Naerssen (p. 504) 
in his claim that the name of the monastery in question 
was Dhimaṇāśrama, for this is not a Sanskrit word and 
the name of the vihāra  was evidently Sanskrit.
17 Cf. also the inscription Mūla-Maluruṅ, plate Vb, lines 
4–5: sīma para sīma . kalaṁ . kalagyan . kamūlan . 
kakurugan . kuṭi vihāra . śāla. parhyaṅan . karṣyan  and 
the inscription Kamalagyan, lines 8–9 (also l. 18–19): 
sīma para sīma , kala, kalagyan , thāni jumput , vihāra 
śāla, kamulan , parhyaṅan , parapatapān  (both cited 
after Boechari 1985–86). The discrepancy of the irst 
with the second list of religious institutions might be 
used for and against the idea that kuṭi = vihāra .

--- [Page 14] ---
217Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
after their chief sponsors or donors” (p. 195), as 
appears from three seals excavated at Nālandā, 
bearing the following legends:18
śrīnālandāyāṁ śrībālādityagandhakuṭī vā ri ka bhi­
k ṣū ṇāṁ
‘belonging to the monks in charge of the Perfume 
Chamber of Śrī Bālāditya at Śrī Nālandā’
śrīnā[landāyāṁ śrī?]dharmapāladevagan dha ku­
ṭī vārikabhikṣūṇāṁ
‘belonging to the monks in charge of the Perfume 
Chamber of Śrī Dharmapāladeva at Śrī Nālandā’
śrīdevapālagandhakuḍyāṁ  (sic)
‘[sealed] in the Perfume Chamber of Devapāla’
I therefore propose that the expression kuṭi 
haji ‘king’s Chamber’ of the Paṇai inscription 
may have denoted a gandhakuṭī  founded by the 
king, or perhaps a monastery as a whole. It seems 
likely that it is somehow related to the expression 
bi(h/y)ara pad(u)ka śri mahār(ā)ja  ‘biara of his 
majesty the king’ in the inscription Si Topayan II, 
to be presented below ( §1.1.6). 
Among other matters of interest is the 
occurrence of the well known Malay words 
such as sungai, (meng)hilir , and sawah, which 
conirm supposition of the importance of riparian 
economy, and indicate that irrigated (rice) 
cultivation must have played some role too.
1.1.2:  Inscription on a bronze Lokanātha image 
from Gunung Tua (ig. 2)
Also known as: —.
Dimensions: b. 43 × h. 44 × w. 17 cm.
Material: bronze.
Provenance: held as heirloom by the Raja of Gunung Tua 
when found.
Present location: National Museum, Jakarta, inv. no. 3309 or 
626 d.
Language/Script: Old Malay and Sanskrit in Palaeosumatran 
script.
18 Cited after Schopen (1990: 194 and 212), with my own 
proposal for emendation of the second case, and my 
own translations. Much additional evidence for royal 
sponsorship of vihāra s in Eastern Indian under the Pāla 
dynasty is furnished by Sanderson (2009: 87–108).Date: 30 March 1039 ce.
Publication history: irst read, translated and discussed 
by Brandes ( NBG  25 [1887], 176–178); provenance 
clariied ( NBG  26 [1888], 60); reading of the Sanskrit 
portion completed by Brandes ( NBG  26 [1888], 130–
131);19 Sanskrit part corrected and elucidated by Kern 
(NBG  27 [1889], 15–16; 28 [1890], 16); previous sec. lit. 
listed by Krom (1914: 112–113); Kern’s contributions 
reprinted with added notes and a tracing in VG 7 (1917), 
142–144; Old Malay portion read anew and dating 
formula analyzed by Damais (1955: 207–208); previous 
publications summarized by Perret et al.  2007: 53; 
inventoried PPS-SBU 04, p. 92.
Available reproductions: unreliable tracing in VG 7 (1917), 
143. Photos Arlo Grifiths and Daniel Perret.
This edition: based on photos and inspection of the original.
Text and translation
(1) 20svasti śakavarṣātīta 96121 caitramāsa,  tithi 
tri tiya sukla, śukravāra, tatkāla juru pā (2)ṇḍai 
suryya barbvat· bhaṭāra lokanātha, °imāni kuśa-
la mulāṇi22 sarbvasatvasādharāṇaṁkr ̥(3)tvā23 °an-
uttarāyāṁ samyaksambodhau parināma yami24 ||25
19 Brandes mentions that a space seems to be left open 
between the signs satvasā and what he reads dhasaṇaṁ  
(my dharāṇaṁ ) in l. 2, and again between nāma and 
yami  in l. 3. The presence of these gaps seems to have a 
technical reason, for they correspond to vertical bands 
on the bronze perhaps representing traces of welding.
20 There is possibly a liminal sign at the opening of the 
text, but what appears as such might be accidental. 
Previous scholars have ignored it.
21 961: thus Damais; read 946 by Brandes and Kern. See 
Damais 1955: 207 n. 2.
22 kuśalamulāṇi : kuśalamalāṇi  Brandes.
23 sarbvasatvasādharāṇaṁkr ̥tvā: sarbvasatva sādha sa ṇaṁ  
Brandes. Kern needlessly ‘corrected’ this to °sādhā ra­
ṇī kr̥tvā. See n. 25 and the Pañcaviṁśatisāhasrikā pra­
jñā pāramitā  citation just below.
24 parināmayami : thus Brandes. Kern normalized pari­
ṇāmaṁyāmi , apparently intending pariṇāmaṁ  yāmi. 
There seems to be an empty space between ma and ya, 
probably corresponding to a place where the bronze 
has been welded.
25 In normalized form, the Sanskrit would run: imāni ku­
śa lamūlāni sarvasattvasādhāraṇaṁ kr ̥tvā anut ta rā yāṁ 
samyaksambodhau pariṇāmayāmi .

--- [Page 15] ---
218Arlo Grifiths
‘Prosperity! Elapsed Śaka year 961, third 
tithi of the waxing (fortnight) of the month of 
Caitra, a Friday. At that time the master smith  
Sūrya manufactured Lord  (bhaṭāra ) Lokanātha. 
[He expressed his intention by citing scripture:] 
‘These roots of what is good do I share with all 
beings and turn over to the unsurpassed, perfect 
enlightenment!’.’
Commentary
If we assume that this image was originally 
produced and worshiped in Padang Lawas — 
which is not entirely certain — it furnishes the 
earliest epigraphical date from the area.26 It irst 
states, in Old Malay, the date of and the artisan 
responsible for the manufacture of the Lokanātha, 
and concludes with a Sanskrit phrase, providing 
a small piece of evidence for the circulation in 
Padang Lawas (if that is where the sculpture 
was made) of Mahāyānasūtras in Sanskrit. This 
concluding Sanskrit phrase seems to mean that 
the “I”, presumably the artisan Sūrya, intended 
to transfer the merit accruing from his handiwork 
to all beings equally. This type of formula 
seems to be suficiently typical of texts of the 
Prajñāpāramitā (‘Perfection of wisdom’) genre 
to presume that such literature was known in the 
artisan’s milieu in the 11th century ce. Indeed, 
Kern has already afirmed without qualiication 
that “the formula turns out to be the core formula 
of the Bodhisattvas” and that “for this one can 
consult the Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā”.27 I 
have not found this precise formula in the Aṣṭa­
sā hasrikā prajñā pāramitā  or anywhere else in 
Indian Buddhist literature, but variations on a 
very similar formula are indeed found frequently 
in that text. For example: 
26 We may disregard the Arabic coin of the early 11th c. 
(see Kalus 2014) as an obvious import.
27 Art. cit., p. 144. See also Schoterman 1986: 11f., for 
evidence, from the manuscript tradition of this text, 
about sites in Sumatra and elsewhere in maritime 
Southeast Asia.sa dānaṁ dadat tān manasikārāṁs tāṁś cit tot-
pādāṁs tāni kuśalamūlāni anuttarāyāṁ sam yak-
saṁ bodhau pariṇāmayati |
‘When he gives a gift he turns over to full 
enlightenment the mental activities, the pro-
ductions of thought, the roots of good which are 
involved in the act of giving.’28
Here we ind the combination of kuśalamūlāni  
with anuttarāyāṁ samyaksaṁbodhau pari ṇā ma     ya­
ti, but nothing corresponding to sarva sat va     sā  dhā­
raṇaṁ kr ̥tvā in the inscription. For that element, 
we may turn to the Pañcaviṁ śati sāha sri    kā  pra­
jñāpāramitā :
yad dānaṁ dadāti tat sarvasattvasādhāraṇaṁ kr ̥-
tvā anuttarāyāṁ samyaksaṁbodhau pari ṇā mayaty 
anupalambhayogena29
‘Whatever gift he gives, he shares it with all 
beings and turns over [the merit produced] to 
the unsurpassed, perfect enlightenment, while 
exerting himself for the non-apprehension [of an 
object to grasp].’
The use of such a Sanskrit formula to conclude 
a ‘business portion’ in vernacular language may 
be compared with the use of a mahāyānistic stanza 
at the end of Kr ̥tanagara’s Old Malay inscription 
on the socle found at Padang Roco,30 or the 
engraving of a single mahāyānistic formula on the 
ive copies in bronze of Amoghapāśa Lokeśvara 
presumably made under the same king’s reign 
(Reichle 2007: 117–118; Krom 1911: 254; Speyer 
1904). The lack of explicit indications in our text 
about the purpose of the inscription leaves one to 
28 Cf. ed. Vaidya (1960: 173); translation cited from 
Conze (1973: 212).
29 Cf. ed. Kimura (1986: 50–51, several occurrences 
within this passage).
30 Cf. Krom 1916: 326, where just the Old Malay text is 
given. The concluding Sanskrit verse at the end of this 
inscription thus far remains unpublished. I intend to 
edit the Padang Roco inscription in a future publication 
on the epigraphical record of Kr ̥tanagara, and will of 
course include the Sanskrit verse there.

--- [Page 16] ---
219Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
assume that the artisan whose labor is explicitly 
recorded intended to record himself the transfer 
of the merit accruing from his effort to all living 
beings, however much one might rather expect 
there to have been a second party who ordered 
the manufacture with a view to making merit.
1.1.3:  Inscription on an elephant­headed stone 
from Porlak Dolok (ig. 3a, 3b, 3c)
Also known as: Dance Figure inscription (Karashima 2002), 
based on a misunderstanding of the iconography of the 
inscribed stone.
Dimensions: h. 109 cm.
Material: a roughly cut piece of grey sandstone or granite, 
showing an elephant-head at its top.
Provenance: locality Porlak Dolok, near the village 
Paringgonan, a few km from the source of the Barumun.
Present location: Museum Nasional, Jakarta, inv. 
no. D. 181.31
Language/Script: Old Malay in Palaeosumatran script; Tamil 
in Tamil script.
Date: 13th century ce, on a date possibly corresponding to 4 
November 1261 .
Publication history: reported by van Stein Callenfels 
(1920: 70);32 irst (largely unsuccessful) attempt at 
31 Damais (1955: 208) guessed that the stone was still 
in situ. But from Crucq (1929: 276) we learn that the 
stone was already at the Museum in 1929, although 
without an inventory number.
32 “Hiermede was het onderzoek der biara’s in Padang 
Lawas afgeloopen en restte nog slechts de inscriptie 
van Porlak Dolok. Den 14den Februari arriveerde ik te 
Si Boehoean en werd de 15de besteed met het maken 
eener abklatsch van dat opschrift. Het is aangebracht 
op een ruwe, onregelmatige steenen pilaar, waarvan 
het topstuk is verhakt tot een Ganeçahoofd, aan de 
achterzijde gedekt door een lotosbloem. De bovenste 
helft der inscriptie is in Oud-Javaansche karakters, 
waarop dan eenige regels volgen in mij onbekende 
letterteekens, waarschijnlijk behoorende tot het een 
of andere V oor-Indische alphabet. De inscriptie in 
Oud-Javaansche letters bleek omloopend gelezen te 
moeten worden en was op de meeste plaatsen zeer 
onduidelijk. Het jaartal was zeer lauw zichtbaar en 
bleek te zijn 1167. De pilaar, waarop het opschrift 
is aangebracht staat midden in het bosch op een 
100 M. terzijde van den grooten weg iets voorbij decipherment by Crucq (1929: 276);33 Old Malay 
portion read with gaps by Damais (1955: 208–209); Old 
Malay portion read differently, again with substantial 
gaps, by Edi Sedyawati (1994a: 446 / 1994b: 326);34 both 
portions published, entirely in Tamil script, with photos 
of estampage, by Subbarayalu (1994: 123–124, pl. 23–
24); discussed on the basis of other scholars’ readings 
by Wisseman Christie (1998: 262–264); republished 
after Subbarayalu 1994 but with a different photo of 
an estampage by Karashima (2002: 14–15, pl. 2.4); 
previous publications summarized by Perret et al. 2007: 
54; inventoried PPS-PBU 12, p. 100.
Available reproductions: published photos of an estampage.35
This edition: after previous publications, controlled by 
published photos of estampage.
de kampoeng Paringgonan. Op deze plaats werden 
nog aangetroffen een vierarmige Ganeça zonder 
aureool zittend tegen een recht achterstuk, niet op een 
lotoskussen, doch op een gewone steenplaat, een been 
in de gewone sila-houding, een been opgetrokken. 
Zeer opvallend waren de leelijke, in den vorm van 
een bijna dichtgevouwen waaier gestyleerde ooren. 
De rechterbovenhand hield de bijl, de linker dito een 
cakra, terwijl de benedenhanden rechts het tandbrok 
en links het etensbakje vast hielden. Verder lag hier 
nog een stuk behakte natuursteen, oorspronkelijk een 
stuk van een dakafdekking of van een poortdak. In elk 
geval bleek er uit, dat ook hier in deze buurt een tempel 
van natuursteen moet gestaan hebben. De bevolking 
beweerde, dat al deze stukken door hunne voorvaderen 
waren meegebracht toen die zich van uit de Tobalanden 
in de Padang Lawas vestigden, eene bewering, die 
natuurlijk niet te controleeren is.”
33 This is the reference that was obscure to Karashima 
(2002: 14, n. 11): “The registration number of this 
stone is D-181. In the registration book the letters ‘ov/
Grucq 276’ are also seen regarding this stone, but their 
meaning is unclear”.
34 The English publication contains a few corrections of 
small typing errors in the Indonesian version, and so it 
is the English publication that I follow here.
35 Subbarayalu’s plates show an estampage on the 
stone; Karashima’s plate shows presumably the same 
estampage rolled out lat. Neither author furnishes any 
information about when/how the estampage was made, 
and where it is now stored. It was presumably made 
on the same occasion, on 30th December 1993, as the 
estampage of the Tamil inscription from Barus (see 
Subbarayalu 1998: 26).

--- [Page 17] ---
220Arlo Grifiths
Text
The stone is currently exhibited in a glass 
casing that allows neither direct inspection 
nor usable photography. I have for this reason 
not been able to read this inscription from the 
original, but have, as far as possible, veriied 
published readings using the published photos 
of an inked estampage. Only the readings of 
Subbarayalu and Karashima (which are almost 
identical) comprise the Tamil part, and only these 
two publications are accompanied by photos of 
an inked estampage. These photos served as the 
principal basis on which I have chosen between 
different published readings, or have proposed 
my own, but they are not everywhere clearly 
readable, so the present edition could certainly 
be improved if that estampage could be consulted 
directly, or if another good estampage would 
become the available.
The text is engraved spiraling downwards 
on the stone, moving down one step every time 
the line has come full circle. For the sake of 
convenience, I follow here the ‘lines’ traceable on 
the estampage of Subbarayalu/Karashima, as these 
two scholars have done. At the ends/beginnings 
of the ‘lines’, it is unclear to me whether the 
process of impression has been carried out with 
some overlap, so that traces of the same signs 
are visible at both ends, or whether a few akṣaras 
more are actually present but unrepresented in 
any published reading.
(1) °oṁ svasti śrī sakavarṣātīta 11[8](3) kārtika-
(2) māsa śuklapakṣa °ekādasī śukravāra revati-
na kṣatra tat[k]āla
(3) nan· senāpati rakan dipaṅkara mandāpat· 
°āpibhurānar ·
(4) hidi tallaḥ gāṅgasekhara namāña ni pandar­
mman· pakāni
(5) (mā)ligai rākan· puṇya pāduka śrī mahā-
rā(ja) [svasti śrī śa-]
(6) [kara]yāṇṭu 1000 1 100 8 [10 3] ... [kārt-]
(7) tikaimāsattu °ekā[daśī] ...
(8) revatinakṣattirattuc ...(9) dīpaṅkara kaṇṭa °ā...
(10) [ca]kāmeṉa[pa]tuvat[ta] ...
(11) tum peritu śrī mahārāja ...
(12) [r]mam
Translation
‘Om! Hail! Fortune! Elapsed Śaka year 1183, 
month of Kārttika, waxing fortnight, the eleventh, 
a Friday, under lunar mansion Revatī. At that time 
did the general of Rokan (called) Dīpaṅkara re -
ceive [...] already Gaṅgāśekhara by name.36 [...] 
the princess’ bower ( māligai)37 of Rokan meri -
torious work of his majesty the king.38 … Hail! 
Fortune! Śaka year 1183, … month of Kārttika, 
eleventh … lunar mansion Revatī … which 
Dīpaṅkara received39 …’ 
36 If the reading pandarmman  is correct, we probably 
have here a Malay derivation with circumix paN...an 
from Skt. dharma, the whole then possibly meaning 
‘funerary shrine’ of ‘gift’.
37 I choose the most speciic meaning of maligai recorded 
by R.J. Wilkinson, A Malay­English Dictionary , part 
II, 721 (s.v. mahaligai ), who writes: “Used loosely 
as a synonym of istana (palace); but in many places 
speciically of the home or chamber of a royal lady”. 
However, in view of the unique bilingual character of 
this inscription, with a second portion in Tamil, it is 
possibly relevant that the Malay word in question is 
originally a loan-word from Tamil māḷikai. Could the 
author of the inscription have been aware of this? The 
University of Madras Tamil Lexicon  (vol. V , p. 3181; 
Supplement, part 1, p. 389) cites the meanings ‘palace, 
temple, mansion, house, top loor of a storied building’ 
for the Tamil word. Some of the Tamil senses may 
also be taken into account for the interpretation of our 
inscription.
38 Or: ‘the princess’ bower of Rokan owned by (supposing 
puṇya = punya ) his majesty the king’.
39 The Malay part gives after dīpaṅkara  a verb form that 
unmistakably means ‘receive’ ( mandāpat  from dapat 
‘to receive’) followed by an object expressed by a 
word whose irst syllable is certainly ° ā (the remainder 
being hard to decipher). Confronted with the sequence 
dīpaṅkara kaṇṭa  °ā in the Tamil part, it seems likely 
that we have here an expression equivalent to the 
Malay sequence. I have been tempted to presume that 
the object was ° abhiṣeka, which would allow taking 
Gaṅgāśekhara as a (tantric) consecration name, but 
this is dificult for both Malay and Tamil unmistakably 

--- [Page 18] ---
221Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Variant readings
Since the variant readings for the Old Malay 
part are at times very distant from each other, at 
times incomplete, at times seem to be the result 
of inconsistencies of the transliteration schemes 
adopted, at time of normalization, and at times 
seem to be misprints, I do not systematically 
cite all variants, although I am quite nearly 
exhaustive. Sigla: D = Damais, Se = Sedyawati, 
Su = Subbarayalu, K = Karashima, vSC = van 
Stein Callenfels.
1.  °oṁ: this invocation, correctly read by Se, is 
omitted by D, Su and K.
1.  svasti: thus D Su K; svati Se (printing error?).
1.  sakavarṣātīta: thus Su K; sakavarṣatita D; 
sakavars ā(tī)ta Se. 
1.  11[8](3): 1135 D; 7/9 - - Se; Su and K indicate 
an unreadable sequence here; vSC read 1167.
1.  kārtika-: kartika D; kārttika Su K; not read by 
Se.
2.  °ekādasī: ekādasi D Se; ekādaśi Su K.
2.  śukravāra: thus D; śukavāra Se; sukravāra Su K.
2–3.  °nakṣatra tat[k]āla nan·: thus Se; °nakṣatra 
tatkāla nan D; °nakṣatra lanan Su K.
3.  rakan dipaṅkara: rakan dīpaṅkara Su K; raka nda 
pangka D; rakandi paŋka Se.
3.  mandāpat·: thus D; mata pa ... Su K; mendāpatya 
Se.
3.  °ā pibhurānar ·: rāji -- -- D; rā mirā °e ... Se; not 
read by Su K. The reading rā given by D and 
Se is impossible to justify on the basis of the 
estampage. The akṣara that was read ji and mi 
respectively by Damais and Sedyawati can at 
best be read as pi (api/āpi  means ‘ire’ in Malay). 
The reading of the italicized inal akṣaras of this 
line is not certain, and the meaning unclear. 
4.  gāṅgasekhara namāña: gangat ... D; gaṅga 
senāranaja Se; kaṅga sebharanamāña Su K. The 
shape of the kha is the typical one for Sumatra 
give ° ā. The word kaṇṭa is a relative participle of the 
verb kāṇ, whose primary meaning is ‘to see’. However, 
based on the hypothesis of equivalence between the 
Malay and Tamil parts, I presume for this verb here the 
meaning ‘to attain, obtain, get’ recorded in the Tamil 
Lexicon  (vol. II, p. 857).in late centuries, and is seen clearly e.g. in 
the Lubuk Layang inscription, face B, l. 4: 
yauvarāja bijayendrasekharā .40
4.  ni pandarmman· pakāni : not read by D; .... ni 
patya ... Se; dīpaṅ ... Su K.
5.  (mā)ligai: haligai D Su; ... ja bhalinaga Se; 
haliga K. It would also be possible to suppose 
presence of an unreadable ma at the end of l. 4, 
to retain the reading ha proposed by previous 
scholars at the start of l. 5, and to restore [ma]­
haligai giving the same meaning.
5–6. [svasti śrī śakara]yāṇṭu 1000 1 100 8 [10 3]: 
… [sakara]yāṇṭu [1108] Subbarayalu; … [sa-
ka ra] yāṇṭu 11[.8] Karashima. śakarayāṇṭu  
(alternatively restorable as saka° or caka°) is 
a spelling variant of the expression cakarai­y­
āṇṭu, recorded in the Tamil Lexicon  (vol. III, 
p. 1217). The full restoration of the opening 
of the dating formula can be made with some 
conidence on the basis of the combined 
evidence of the parallel formulae in the Old 
Malay portion of this same inscription, and that 
seen in the Lobu Tua Tamil inscription, lines 
1–2 cakarai āṇṭu  (Subbarayalu 1998: 28). On 
the (partly conjectural) reading of the numerals, 
see my discussion below.
6–7. ... [kārt]tikai māsattu °ekā[daśī] ...: some of 
the syllables lost as the end of these lines are 
restored here on the hypothesis that both Old 
40 Not much published information is available yet about 
this inscription from Pasaman in the northern part 
of West Sumatra province. I must note here that the 
observations of Satyawati Suleiman (1977 [2008]: 
59) are partly misleading: “The characters are Old 
Sumatran script, which look slightly different from 
the characters in Ādityawarman’s inscriptions, yet 
there are still enough similarities. The characters are 
very much unlike those used by the kings of Sriwijaya 
and also unlike Javanese characters. They have more 
similarities with the characters used in Cambodia. 
(according to Boechari)”. In fact the similarity with 
the script seen in Ādityavarman’s inscriptions is so 
striking that hardly any distinction can be made, and 
the similarity with the script of several of the Padang 
Lawas inscriptions is also quite close indeed. The cited 
reading is taken from the EFEO estampages for this 
inscription (n. 2005 and n. 2006).

--- [Page 19] ---
222Arlo Grifiths
Malay and Tamil portion express the same date. 
See the discussion below. The precise spelling 
of the quantième  is of course uncertain (the 
most likely alternative being ekādasī).
7.  māsattu: thus Su; mācattu K.
9.  kaṇṭa °ā: thus Su;  kaṇṭa °a K.
12.  This line is entirely unreadable to me on the 
estampage, so I follow blindly the reading of Su 
and K.
Commentary
This is a unique bilingual inscription in Old 
Malay and Tamil.41 The language of the irst 
part was correctly identiied by Louis-Charles 
Damais, whose reading was ignored in subsequent 
publications which wrongly assumed that the 
language was or could be Old Javanese, or was “a 
variety of Old Malay heavily inluenced by Old 
Javanese language”. By contrast with Wisseman 
Christie (1998: 262), I see no trace at all of heavy 
inluence of Old Javanese language, nor do I 
agree with her when she calls the script “Javanese 
kawi ”. The script is the same as that in other 
vernacular languages of the area,42 and shows a 
striking resemblance with some palaeographic 
features observed in the inscriptions of West 
Sumatra (those issued by Ādityavarman as well as 
the one from Lubuk Layang in Pasaman regency, 
relatively close to the border with North Sumatra, 
undated and not mentioning Ādityavarman), e.g. 
in the shape of vocalization ai and of akṣara kha. 
Also in the dating formula, there is no question 
of omission of any Javanese elements ( pace 
Wisseman Christie 1998: 263). The dating formula 
of this Malay part in fact conforms quite closely to 
those seen in the inscriptions of Gunung Tua and 
Si Joreng Belangah, and clearly follows a locally 
current model. 
41 The suggestion of Wisseman Christie (1998: 262) 
that there is another bilingual inscription is incorrect: 
the lost Batu Bapahat inscription of West Sumatra 
comprised surfaces in South Indian Grantha and in 
local script, but both used Sanskrit language.
42 See my introduction, p. 213, for a discussion of the 
problem of nomenclature for Sumatran script(s).I have argued thus far for the need to abandon 
a Javano-centric perspective in interpreting this 
document, and will now turn briely to what we 
may learn about local history by a critical re-
edition of the text and an interpretation through 
local Sumatran lens. I owe the interpretation of 
rakan/rākan  as Rokan to Uri Tadmor.43 The same 
scholar also pointed me to the possibility of reading 
the meaningful word māligai (or mahaligai ), not 
explicitly recognized by previous scholars. Now 
the recovery of this word ixes the word boundaries 
at the start of line 5, so that we must indeed accept 
that this inscription contains both rakan and rākan, 
almost certainly spelling variants for one word. 
The upstream area of the Rokan river was home to 
a small kingdom into the twentieth century.44 An 
earlier entity that may have been a predecessor of 
modern Rokan is mentioned in the Deśavarṇana  
(13.1) as Rəkan. Given the relative proximity of 
the upper reaches of the Rokan river system to 
the indspot of our inscription (near the source of 
the Barumun), and the occurrence of the syntactic 
construction biyara pāduka śri mahārāja  in the 
Si Topayan II inscription (§1.1.6 below), which 
is apparently comparable to māligai rākan puṇya 
pāduka śrī mahārāja  in the present text, Tadmor’s 
suggestions are indeed very attractive.
The contents of the inscription do not seem to 
allude to the elephant-headed igure that adorns 
the top of the stone. It is possible that this igure 
represents the god Gaṇeśa, as has generally been 
43 In an email of 17/09/2011, he wrote to me: “I am 
not familiar with a meaning of rekan (Indonesia) / 
rakan (Malaysia) other than ‘companion, associate’. 
However, Rakan is how the kingdom of Rokan 
appears in classical Malay literature. This was a Malay 
kingdom on the Sumatran side of the Malacca Straits. 
The occasional long vowel in rākan makes me think 
that maybe we are dealing with the name Rakan here 
rather than with the common noun rekan/rakan which 
probably had a inal accent.” On the use of phonetic 
accent and graphemic ‘long’ vowels as a criterion in 
the reconstruction of the history of the Malay language, 
see Tadmor 2000.
44 See Schnitger (1939: 43): “To this day the ruler of 
Rokan must make a pilgrimage to Moeara Takoes 
before coronation”.

--- [Page 20] ---
223Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
assumed, but there is no unequivocal evidence in 
support of this identiication.  On the signiicance 
of the title senāpati, see my discussion below, 
p. 238. On the mythical Buddha Dīpaṅkara, his 
iconography and his Indonesian connection, see 
Vergati 1982, de Casparis 1997a, and the gold 
inscription below (§1.2.1). Apropos of that gold 
inscription, Schnitger (1936: 39) had assembled 
the attestations known to him of the name in 
epigraphy and listed sculptural representations 
of this Buddha. Use as a proper name, not of the 
Buddha but of a person, is seen e.g. in three Old 
Javanese inscriptions of the early 9th century (see 
Damais 1970: 363).
This name is only one of several elements 
that appear to be shared between the Tamil and 
the Malay portion. Starting from the elements of 
the two dating formulae whose correspondence 
cannot be coincidental (month Kārttika, quan­
tième  11, and lunar mansion Revatī), my inter-
pretation of the whole inscription is based on 
the hypothesis that we have in this text a true 
bilingual (or something close to it), expressing 
the same contents in two languages. A relatively 
straightforward argument based on this hypothesis 
has been advanced in n. 39. But my interpretation 
of the dating formulae requires to be discussed 
at some length, while admitting openly that the 
whole is strongly hypothetical and can stand only 
if we may legitimately assume coherence between 
all the data.
In Malay as well as Javanese epigraphy, 
millésimes  always indicate elapsed years45 and are 
expressed either in chronograms or in the decimal 
place value system. A chronogram is impossible 
here, so we have every reason to expect four digits 
in line 1. Previous scholars have unanimously 
read 11 for the 103 and 102 positions, which places 
us in the twelfth Śaka century. Damais’ reading 
1135 appears to me the only viable option among 
published readings, but I cannot identify the 5, 
whereas the 3 is possible but not certain, and may 
stand in the position of the units rather than the 
tens. We may at least assume that the dating to the 
45 Cf. Damais 1951: 9.1100s is secure, and this happens to agree with the 
century that has been read in the Tamil portion. 
However, calendrical facts show that a Friday 
the eleventh of the waxing fortnight of  Kārttika 
under Revatī occurred only in the years 1156, 
1180, and 1197, and this leads to questioning 
Damais’ reading of the 101 and 100 positions (as 
well as the calculations based on it).46 Indeed, 
Damais was able settle on a date in 1135 only by 
arguing around a one day discrepancy between 
the weekday shown by modern tables (Kārttika 
waxing 11 = Saturday or even Sunday) and 
ignoring altogether the lunar mansion.
It must be pointed out now that the published 
readings of the Tamil millésime  are interpretations 
of igures expressed not in the familiar decimal 
place system, but in the decimal system 
without zero, which is used as a rule in Tamil 
epigraphy.47 Subbarayalu has not made explicit 
why the interpretation 1108 was chosen, nor has 
Karashima explained why he prefers to leave open 
the position of the tens. Subbarayalu’s choice 
seems to imply a reading 1000 1 100 8  (i.e. four 
signs). This admittedly does seem possible, but it 
leaves us with a millésime  irreconcilably different 
from any reading proposed for that in the Malay 
portion, and is equally non-conformant with the 
calendrical speciications. Other readings of the 
sequence of numeral signs are possible, and with 
some good will it is also possible to detect traces 
of more numeral signs after the irst four. Tamil 
epigraphy sometimes shows dates in the current 
(rather than elapsed) reckoning: for instance in 
the Lobu Tua inscription, this is made explicit by 
the word cellāni[ṉ]ṟa  (Subbarayalu 1998: 28).48 
However, there are also Tamil inscriptions expli-
cit ly dated in elapsed reckoning, and cases 
46 I rely here on information provided by J.C. Eade.
47 Cf. Renou & Filliozat 1953: 703 and 706. This system 
is different from either of the two systems described 
in Soutif 2008, a paper which nonetheless deserves 
mention here as a useful introduction to numbering 
systems in ancient Southeast Asian epigraphy, based 
on Khmer inscriptions.
48 Emmanuel Francis considers that this may be in need 
of emendation to an absolutive form, cellāniṉṟu .

--- [Page 21] ---
224Arlo Grifiths
where the reckoning system is not made explicit, 
but has to be elapsed.49 Given the number of 
correspondences between other elements of the 
two parts of this inscription, it seems somewhat 
more likely that both expressed the same millésime  
in the same reckoning system, than to presume 
that the Malay date was expressed with elapsed 
and the Tamil date with current reckoning.
Based on this assumption, I propose as hypo-
thesis to read six signs (the latter two only dimly 
detectable on the estampage): 1000 1 100 8 [10 
3].50 This yields the year 1000 + (1 × 100) + (8 × 
10) + 3 = 1183 Śaka, and allows us to reconcile 
this date with that in the Malay portion, provided 
we read the latter as 1183, which is a possible 
reading there (while the Malay millésime  can 
certainly not be read as 1156 or 1197 and nor can 
the Tamil millésime  be read in any way to construe 
the values 1156 or 1197). The date in 1183 Śaka 
(elapsed) is convertible to 4 November 1261 ce, 
which was a Friday. The sole objection that may 
be made against this conversion is that the lunar 
mansion Revatī only commenced at about mid-
day, whereas dating formulae normally cite the 
lunar mansion that was current at the beginning of 
the tithi, which was Uttarabhadrapada on the 11th 
waxing of Kārttika in 1183 śaka . In this regard, 
a better match might be found in 1180 śaka , 
when the same weekday, quantième , fortnight 
and month correspond to 8 November 1258, 
and daybreak indeed fell under Revatī.51 But I 
tentatively opt against the reading 1180 for, as 
49 J.C. Eade has referred me to Kielhorn (1902–1903: 
171–179) giving a list of dated South Indian inscriptions 
indicating which ones are in current reckoning; these 
are a minority.
50 My source for deciphering the signs in question is table 
7 in Subrahmaniam 1956: 1565, kindly supplied to me 
by Emmanuel Francis, to whom I am indebted also 
for extensive discussion of the Tamil millésime  and 
possible ways to read it.
51 More accurately, the date in 1258 ce assumes an 
underlying date Śaka 1180 (elapsed), nija Kārttika, 11th 
of the waxing fortnight. The fact that a month counts as 
nija, i.e. the month falling after an intercalary ( adhika) 
month bearing the same name, is not normally marked 
in dating formulae. I owe this information, as well as 
the cited date conversions, to J.C. Eade.mentioned above, the estampage seems to show 
a trace of a 3.
Given the palaeographic similarities with 
inscrip tions from West Sumatra that belong to the 
end of the 13th century of the Śaka era, it is certainly 
convenient to be able to date this inscription later 
in the 12th Śaka century than Damais’ reading 
allows, but we are still far removed from the end 
of the 13th, and if anything the above discussion 
will have made clear how tentative the present 
dating proposal remains, given the number of 
uncertain variables.
1.1.4: Inscription on a stone slab from Tandihat I 
(ig. 4a, 4b)
Also known as: Si Joreng Belangah.
Dimensions: w. 53.5 × d. 18.5 × h. 20 (or 19 without the 
protruding layer) cm.
Material: a rectangular/bar-like block of tuff stone that 
shows clear traces of having been sawed off from an 
originally larger artefact.52 There is a protruding layer 
on the top, which seems to be a section from a circle 
that was probably completed on the parts of the original 
that are now no longer available. According to JBG 
III (1936: 199) and other sources,53 the corner of the 
stone corresponding to the right side of the inscription 
is marked with the candrakapāla , a symbol combining 
skull and crescent moon in one, often seen in Java. 
The identiication of the sculpture as such seems rather 
questionable to me (cf. ig. 4b).
Provenance: Tandihat I.
52 The object was deinitely square when it was irst 
observed, but must have been amputated shortly 
thereafter. For Schnitger (1937: 21) tells us: “North of 
the main temple lies a small brick building, temple II, 
… Above the 1.90 m wide steps I found in June, 1935, 
a square plaque, 53 × 53, 16 cm thick, with a circular 
protuberance on the upper surface. In front is a two-line 
inscription in old Javanese script … On the right corner 
is chiseled a skull with a crescent moon. On the plaque 
lay a sunshade. At the southeast and southwest corners 
of the building lay two more sunshades (42 and 65 cm 
in diameter), but perhaps these belonged to the main 
temple”. Contrast the dimensions which I have myself 
recorded.
53 Besides Schnitger, quoted in the preceding note, Rumbi 
Mulia 1980: 27; Perret et al. 2007: 54.

--- [Page 22] ---
225Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Present location: Museum Nasional, Jakarta, inv. no. D. 165 
(= 17987).
Language/Script: Old Malay in Palaeosumatran script.
Date: 26 April 1179 ce according to Damais (1955: 208).
Publication history: stone described in JBG III (1936: 199);54 
inscription published by Bosch in Schnitger 1936: 13, 
39; circumstances of stone’s discovery described by 
Schnitger (1937: 21); republished by Damais (1952: 
100–101 n. 2);55 published again, with signiicant 
improvements, by Damais (1955: 208 n. 1); previous 
publications summarized by Perret et al . (2007: 54); 
inventoried PPS-SBU 08, p. 96. The reading of Bosch 
cited by Schnitger is very incomplete and defective. 
Damais’ second reading is faultless except for one 
evident mistake in l. 2.
Available reproductions: photo made by or on behalf of 
Theodoor van Erp (1874–1958), held in UB Leiden 
P-045435;56 photos D. Perret.
This edition: based on inspection of the stone and photos.
54 “D 165 Rechthoekige steen met op het bovenvlak 
halvemaanvormig kussen, op den rechterhoek voor-
stelling van doodshoofd met halve maan; op het 
voorvlak tweeregelige inscriptie in oud-Jav. schrift. 
Br. 53, h. 16, d 18 cm. Afk. Si Djoreng Belangah (Inv. 
Buiten bez. p. 109 regel 4 v. b.)”. The reference to 
“Inv. Buitenbez. p. 109 regel 4 v. b” here denotes the 
Voorlopige Lijst van Oudheden in de Buitenbezittingen  
(Krom 1914). The inscription is not mentioned there.
55 Damais (1952: 100 n. 2) explained:  “Notre transcription 
faite directement sur la pierre diffère légèrement de 
celle du Professeur Bosch publiée par Schnitger.” And 
in Damais (1955: 208 n. 1) it is clariied: “Ayant eu 
l’occasion d’examiner à nouveau il y a quelque temps 
la pierre originale, cette transcription diffère quelque 
peu de celle que nous avons donnée dans EEI, III: 100–
101, note 2. On remarquera que l’inscription débute 
par la syllabe oṃ (d’ailleurs fortement stylisée) et non, 
comme nous l’avions cru tout d’abord, par une variété 
du signe introductif”.
56 The photo can be viewed by going to https://socrates.
leidenuniv.nl/ and illing in “P-045435” as search term. 
The online metadata do not state that the photo belongs 
to the collection van Erp. The “Date of creation” is 
estimated to be 1910–1930, but this is evidently wrong, 
for the inscription was not discovered before 1935, and 
the photo seems to show it when it had already been 
moved to Jakarta. Van Erp himself did not mention 
the inscription or make use of this photo in his own 
contribution on the archaeology of Padang Lawas (van 
Erp 1941). Thanks are due to Gerda Theuns (Leiden) 
for identifying the photo as belonging to the van Erp 
collection and explaining that the “Date of creation” is 
only a rough estimate.Text and translation
(1) °oṁ diṅ śaka 1101 bulan· besāka tithi pañca-
(2)  mi kr ̥ṣṇapākṣa br ̥haspativ ăra divasa sana57  
tatkăla hulun· 
(3)  kambaṁ
‘Om. In the58 Śaka [year] 1101, month of 
Vaiśākha, ifth tithi of the waning fortnight, 
weekday a Thursday. At that time Hulun 
Kambang.’
Commentary
The inscription is incomplete, for it records 
only a date and what seems to be the title of the 
agent of an act whose purpose it must have been 
for this inscription to record. Neither on the basis 
of the artefact itself, nor of the inscription, can we 
make any positive statement about the (religious) 
context of the artefact or of the nature of the act 
that was to be recorded. But the date is precious, 
as is the occurrence of the widespread Malay 
formula sana tatkāla  not previously recognized 
here (see n. 57), which underlines the extent to 
which Padang Lawas was part of a ‘Malay world’ 
going centuries back. 
The title (or name) Hulun Kambang is unique. 
See Daniel Perret (1995: 117 / 2010: 142) on the 
role of a igure called ulun janji  in the Sultanate 
of Deli in 19th-century North Sumatra, and note 
the appareance of hulun already in the Old 
Malay Telaga Batu or Sabokingkin inscription of 
Śrīvijaya (de Casparis 1956: 37 n. 14). Uri Tadmor 
wrote the following to me about it in an email 
of July 2010: “The etymological relationship 
between (h)ulu  ‘head’ (also used iguratively, 
57 divasa sana : diva sana  Damais. The combination sana 
tatkāla  is also found in the inscription of Talang Tuwo, 
l. 1 (684 ce; Cœdès 1930: 39), in the Laguna copper 
plate inscription, l. 2 (900 ce; Postma 1992: 186) — 
here both times in the spelling sāna tatkāla  —, and in 
the irst of the Sorik Merapi inscriptions (D. 84, p. 234 
below).
58 The deinite article translates the morpheme ṅ (lost in 
modern Malay), on which cf. Adelaar 2004.

--- [Page 23] ---
226Arlo Grifiths
as in hulu balang  ‘head of a military unit’) and 
(h)ulun ‘slave’ is clear although it is not easy to 
explain the development.  But cf. the title Sang 
Ulun  used in Panji and also occasionally in Hang 
Tuah and in Sejarah Melayu  with reference to a 
ruler or a deity.  Penghulu , also of the same root, 
is probably the most common term for an oficial 
in Classical Malay literature.  So I’m pretty sure 
that Ulun in Ulun Kambang  refers to an oficial 
of some sort rather than to a slave.  The kambang 
part is more dificult to explain, but it’s probably 
the same word as modern kembang ‘blossom, 
lourish, develop’ (the meaning ‘lower’ was 
borrowed from Javanese).  If it was a modern term 
I’d interpret it as ‘Minister for Development’...”.
1.1.5–6:  Inscriptions on two stone pedestals from 
Si Topayan I and II (ig. 5a, 5b and 6a, 6b)
Two inscribed pedestals were recovered 
from the site Si Topayan. Based on the shape 
of the characters, in which some have seen a 
form of ‘proto-Batak’ script, the two Si Topayan 
inscriptions are probably the latest written traces 
of the Buddhist period in this region.
Also known as: —.
Dimensions: I: 65 × 61 cm a t the top, 54 × 55 cm at the 
bottom, 49 cm in height. II: 60 × 58 cm at the top, 58 × 43 
cm at the bottom, 50 cm in height.
Material: tuff stone.
Provenance: Biaro Si Topayan.
Present location: Museum Negeri Propinsi Sumatra Utara 
1517.1 = 04.254 and 1517.2 = 04.255.
Language/Script: Old Malay in Palaeosumatran (possibly to 
be considered Proto-Batak) script.
Date: possibly the 14th or 15th century ce.
Publication history: described with information about the 
circumstances of discovery and the original in situ 
location of the pedestals by van Stein Callenfels (1920: 
66, with pl. 5–6 = OD-4172 and 4173);59 inscriptions 
59 “Op het pleintje voor den tempel kwamen twee 
vierkante steenblokken voor den dag in den vorm 
van voetstukken doch zonder gat in den bovenkant 
en zonder tuit. Op deze voetstukken werden twee 
inscriptie’s aangetroffen op de bovenste lijst. Op het irst edited by Bosch (1930: 134–135, 243) with photos 
of impressions (pl. 43) and drawings I and V showing 
the precise original positions of the pedestals, and an 
addendum reporting a hypothesis of Goris about the 
possibility that inscription I comprises a chronogram;60 
text reproduced from Bosch by Schnitger (1937: 32); 
proposal of Goris refuted by Damais (1963: 542, n. 3); 
texts reinterpreted by Nik Hassan Shuhaimi (1992: 77); 
physical description only of pedestal 1571.2 (under 
the number 1517) in Hasanuddin et al . 1994/95: 54; 
inscriptions mentioned by Rita M.S. 2001: 95; edited 
with eye-copies by Rita M.S. & Sri Hartini 2002: 8–10; 
re-edited almost identically in Rita M.S. et al . 2003: 
no. 4–5, p. 8–9; previous publications summarized by 
Perret et al . (2007: 54); inventoried PPS-SBU 5–6, 
p. 93–94.
Available reproductions: photos OD-17041 and 17042; 
paper impressions of the inscriptions, reproduced in OV 
1930, pl. 43; EFEO estampages n. 1863 and 1864.
This edition: based on inspection of the pedestals and of the 
estampages.
meest Noordelijke voetstuk bevindt die inscriptie zich 
op de Oostelijke en Noordelijke zijde. Op het Zuidelijke 
voetstuk staat het zeer korte inschrift slechts op de 
bovenlijst aan de Zuidzijde. De beide inscriptie’s zijn 
in Oud-Javaansche letters, doch hebben de karakters 
een merkwaardigen, hoekigen vorm, ongetwijfeld 
den vorm vertegenwoordigende, waaruit het moderne 
Batakschrift is ontstaan.” Rumbi Mulia (1980: 17, 
pl. 8–9) shows two photos of the two pedestals on the 
site, before they were moved to the museum. One of 
these photos is OD-4172 reproduced from OV 1920, 
the other dates from 1976.
60 “Dr. Goris maakte er mij op attent, dat in de tweede 
inscriptie van Si Topajan de woorden achter pu, hang, 
sang en hang wellicht sengkala-waarde bezitten 
(sapta = 7; buddhi = 5; imba = rūpa = 1 en langgar 
= 1). Het jaartal 1157 çaka zou den ouderdom van de 
bouwwerken in de Padang Lawas, althans van den 
biaro Si Topajan, iets hooger opvoeren dan op de op 
p. 146 vlg. uiteengezette gronden werd aangenomen; 
de eenigszins gewrongen verklaring van tatkala zou 
kunnen komen te vervallen en deze uitdrukking hare 
gewone beteekenis herkrijgen. Een bezwaar tegen 
de voorgestelde interpretatie schuilt m.i. in het zeer 
ongewone gebruik van pu enz. voor de sengkala-
woorden.”

--- [Page 24] ---
227Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Text and translation of Si Topayan I
(A1) || tat·kāla61 haṁ tah(i) si raṁṅit·  
(A2) kabuyin·62 panyarariṁ63 babvat· bakas·64 
(B1) brahala sātap· ||
‘At that time (or: When) Hang Tahi65 [and] Si 
Rangit ... made a house for the gods under one 
roof.’
Text and translation of Si Topayan II
(1) || (pu sa)pta66 haṁ buddhi sa°imba(ṁ)67 haṁ 
la(ṁ)gar·68 tat· la69 °itu
(2) babvat· bi(h/y)ara70 pad(u)ka 
 śri mahār(ā)ja71 ||
61 The space between ta and t· is larger than average and 
the damage to the stone that is visible there may thus be 
presumed to predate the placement of the inscription.
62 kabuyin : kaba(ga?)yin  Bosch. Cf. kabayan in the 
Paṇai inscription. However, in comparison with 
the unquestionable cases of the akṣara bu in buddha 
(Tandihat II) and buddhi  (Si Topayan II), it seems quite 
certain we must read bu here as well, although it cannot 
be excluded entirely that the vertical extension which I 
read as u is in fact accidental, so that ba must be read.
63 panyarariṁ : pvanyavari  Bosch. The anusvāra is not 
absolutely certain but seems relatively clear.
64 Cf. Malay bagas ‘house’. We do not have here a 
precursor of modern bekas ‘remainder’.
65 Tahi is a patronym among the Bataks (personal 
communication from Daniel Perret).
66 (pu sa)pta : the irst two akṣaras are almost entirely 
worn away on the stone, but what remains does not 
disagree with Bosch’ reading pu sapta.
67 sa°imba(ṁ) : saṁ °imba  Bosch.
68 la(ṁ)gar· : the presence of anusvāra, read by Bosch, 
seems quite uncertain, but cannot be rejected with full 
conidence.
69 tat· la: Bosch corrected this to tat·kāla. The proposal is 
convincing.
70 bi(h/y)ara : biyara Bosch. See Bosch’ note on this 
word. Inspection of the stone shows that there is neither 
a clear horizontal connection between the top, nor 
between the bottom extremities of the center and right 
vertical of the sign in question, so that neither h nor y 
can be read with certainty.
71 mahār(ā)ja : maharaja  Bosch. The irst length-mark 
is certain. The second is itself invisible, but the top 
part of the r is signiicantly longer than that of the ra ‘Pu Sapta, Hang Buddhi, on equal terms with 
Hang La(ng)gar, at that time made the biara of 
his majesty the king.’
Commentary
In the second inscription, the expression tat­
kāla itu  (cf. Gonda 1973: 591) seems to be 
equivalent to sana tatkāla , discussed above. I 
ind unconvincing Bosch’ proposal that tatkāla, 
here and in the irst inscription,  would not have 
its normal meaning,72 but would be equivalent to 
Sundanese sakakala ‘memorable moment, mark 
of commemoration’. It was previously believed 
by some scholars that the second inscription 
comprises a chronogram, but Bosch and Damais 
provided convincing arguments against this idea, 
and my new reading sa°imba(ṁ)  (mod. seimbang ) 
removes the possibility of considering imba (as 
Bosch read) a synonym of rūpa  in the value 1, and 
hence the possibility of seeing any chronogram 
here. We are thus left without any means to date 
these inscriptions other than palaeography. Given 
the absence of other dateable written documents 
in local scripts from north Sumatra between the 
14th century and the earliest known Batak pusaha, 
earlier in this line, and we may guess that this was to 
accommodate the descending part of a length-mark, 
which itself was lost in this very worn part of the 
inscription.
72 In all inscriptions known to me, this normal meaning 
is ‘at that time’ (see de Casparis 1956: 16 with n. 6 
and 219 n. 42), and not (as in modern Malay) ‘at the 
time that’. The expression has changed meaning and 
syntactic position from Old Malay to more recent forms 
of Malay, and is hence apt to mislead native speakers of 
Malay/Indonesian, although in this case it may already 
have the modern meaning. In either case, the sentence 
must be presumed to depend on some textual element 
found on an associated object, to be read before or 
after the present one. If Nik Hassan Shuhaimi is right 
to read tatkāla here in the meaning ‘when’, then the 
two Si Topayan inscriptions can be read together, in the 
way he does, as a dependent clause ( tatkāla) followed 
by a main clause ( tatkāla itu ). But such distribution 
of a single sentence over two dissociated/dissociable 
artefacts is very unusual.

--- [Page 25] ---
228Arlo Grifiths
donated to the British Library in 1764 ce,73 the 
only thing that can be said about the date of the 
Si Topayan inscriptions (surely contemporary the 
one with the other) is that they probably have to 
be situated after the latest dated inscription of 
Padang Lawas (Porlak Dolok, tentatively ascribed 
above to the second half of the 13th c.), which 
makes a signiicantly more archaic palaeographic 
impression,74 but before the Batak pustahas, 
which show fully developed Batak script. Hence 
my estimate 14th–15th century.
The word for ‘god’, brahala , in Si Topayan 
I corresponds to modern Malay berhala.75 The 
same word lies behind the forms bharāla/bharā­
lī indicating Buddhist deities for example in 
the (Nāgarī) label inscriptions of Candi Jago in 
East Java.76 In any case, the assumption that we 
are dealing with one or more Buddhist images 
is rendered virtually certain by the general 
predominance of Buddhism in Padang Lawas, 
and by the text of Si Topayan II, which records 
the foundation of a biara . The inscriptions hence 
inform us about the installation of Buddhist 
images and a biara ‘of the king’. On the meaning 
of biara, see my discussion below (p. 240).
1.2. Three mantra inscriptions 
Inscriptions on precious metal plaques or foil, 
or on bronze images, are among the most precious 
traces of the former presence of Buddhist Sūtras 
and Tantras in Indonesia, where no actual texts 
73 See Gallop & Arps 1991: 115, no. 87.
74 It must be admitted that comparison is hindered by 
a noticeable difference in style of writing. The same 
problem would apply to an even greater extent if 
we were to attempt to include in our comparison the 
dated inscriptions of Minye Tujuh in Aceh (1381 ce, 
see van der Molen 2007) and of Pengkalan Kempas in 
Malaysia (1463/4 ce, see de Casparis 1980) which are 
both written very decoratively in relief.
75 It seems possible that the word survives in the name of 
the complex Biaro Bahal in Padang Lawas.
76 Both these forms are related to the word bhaṭāra seen 
in the Gunung Tua inscription. These word-forms are 
all discussed below (p. 242–3) in the Appendix to this 
contribution.of these genres have survived as such.77 From 
ancient Padang Lawas, three strips of inscribed 
gold foil have so far been retrieved. Two of them 
display the viśvavajra  symbol,78 around which are 
inscribed, in Nāgarī script, some tantric mantras 
whose proper reading was thus far problematic 
but can now be drastically improved in the light of 
the discovery of signiicant correspondences with 
chapter ive of book two of the Hevajratantra  in 
one case, and nearly complete agreement with a 
speciic mantra from that chapter in the second. For 
reasons that will become clear, both are presented 
here together. A somewhat different third foil, not 
previously published, will be treated separately.
1.2.1–2:  gold foils from Aek Sangkilon and 
Tandihat II (ig. 7 and 8)
Also known as: —.
Dimensions: 13 × 5 cm; 12.5 × 4.5 cm.
Material: gold.
Provenance: Aek Sangkilon and Tandihat II.
Present location: Museum Nasional, Jakarta, inv. nrs. 6146 
(= E. 64) and 6149.
Language/Script: Sanskrit, Nāgarī (MNI 6146: engraved, 
MNI 6149: embossed).
Date: ca 13th c.79
Publication history: described respectively in JBG 3 (1936: 
199)80 and 4 (1937: 159); read by Stutterheim (1937: 
147–148 with pl. 4 between pp. 152 and 153), a few 
alternative readings proposed by Bosch reported in 
notes.
77 Cf. Grifiths (2011) for examples from Jambi; Cruijsen, 
Grifiths & Klokke (2013) and Grifiths, Revire & 
Sanyal (2013) for examples from Java; Grifiths (2014a, 
2014b) for bronze, gold and silver material from 
Kalimantan (Borneo), the Cirebon Shipwreck, Java and 
Bali. On “the question of what […] Mantrayāna texts 
were known” in ancient Indonesia, see also Woodward 
2004: 338–345.
78 Cf. Claudine Bautze-Picron’s contribution to this 
volume, p. 119.
79 I owe this dating estimate to Gouriswar Bhattacharya 
and Diwakar Acharya.
80 The reference to “Inv. Buitenbez. no. 82” again de-
notes the Voorlopige Lijst van Oudheden in de Buiten­
bezittingen , published in OV 1914. The ins crip tion is 
not mentioned there.

--- [Page 26] ---
229Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Available reproductions: Stutterheim 1937, pl. 4; photos 
Véronique Degroot, Arlo Grifiths, Daniel Perret.
This edition: based on repeated inspection of the originals 
aided by photos.
MNI 6146 Aek Sangkilon81
(1)                  hūm ̐
(2)      [siddham] °om ̐ aṣṭāna82 
(3) caturvim ̐śatinetrāya tadanu
(4) ....... ṣ[e] kapālamālāneka83 
(5) māraya māraya kāraya kāra
(6) ..... (sāga)rān· vandhaya vandha84 
(7) rakṣa rakṣa śrīkaruṇālaya vi85
(8) ........... (ruka)sya sapari86 
(9) darānandasya  dīpaṁkarasya datra87 
81 The irst plaque must be read in the round starting from 
the center moving outward, and my line numbering 
(different from Stutterheim’s) relects this fact. From 
an observation of Bosch cited by Schnitger (1936: 39), 
it is clear that Bosch had seen the need to read in a 
circle, and the implication that we have here only a 
part of the circle, but he did not see (or at least did not 
mention) that the mantra has to be read from the inside 
out.
82 This was om̐ aṣṭānanāya , the start of the mantra. The 
rest of the word is lost.
83 This was probably part of kr̥ṣṇajīmūtavapuṣe kapāla­
mā lā ne kadhāriṇe , i.e. Hevajratantra  2.5.46cd.
84 This must have been part of śoṣaya śoṣaya saptasāgarān 
bandha bandha nāgāṣṭakān  (cf. Hevajratantra  2.5.47, 
also partly found on MNI 6149). For vandhaya vandha  
instead of bandha bandha , note that MNI 6149 shows 
expected vandha vandha . The variant with vandhaya  
seems not to be known in other Sanskrit Hevajra-
sources that have thus far come to light. On these, I 
refer to Isaacson 2002a, 2002b, 2009.
85 The element śrīkaruṇālaya  ‘illustrious store-house 
of compassion’ may be an epithet of Hevajra. The 
protective element rakṣa rakṣa  (whose reading seems a 
little uncertain to me) is found at the outset of the ritual 
sequence taught in the Ratnākaraśānti’s Bhrama hara­
nāma­Hevajrasādhana  (ed. Isaacson 2002b: 157).
86 Harunaga Isaacson suggests to me that a few entirely 
missing syllables can conidently be restored before 
and after these akṣaras: herukasya saparivārasya .
87 None of this is found in any other Hevajra source 
known to me. On the name Dīpaṅkara, see p. 223 
above. The context is too incomplete to be able to tell 
with certainty, but it seems that the name here denotes MNI 6149 Tandihat II
(1) vandha vandha nāgā- 
(2) ṣṭakān· gr ̥hna gr ̥-
(3) hna viśvasamasyāsa -
(4) trūn·88  ha hā hi hī
(5) hūm ̐
(6) hu hū he hai
(7) ho hau haṁ ha[ḥ]
(8) °oṁ °āḥ hūṁ
The Hevajratantra  is the principal scripture 
associated with the cult of the tantric deity 
Hevajra. It seems useful to point out irst that we 
have sculptural evidence, in the form of a large 
stone stela found at Biaro Bahal II, of the worship 
in Padang Lawas of the deity Heruka,89 the alter 
ego of Hevajra when he appears without consort.90 
I must then note that in the mentioned chapter of 
the Hevajratantra , Hevajra describes himself to 
his consort as (verses 8–10):
aṣṭāsyaṁ catuścaraṇaṁ bhujaṣoḍaśabhūṣitaṁ |
caturmārāsamākrāntaṁ bhayasyāpi bhayānakaṁ ||
muṇḍamālākr ̥tahāraṁ sūryasthaṁ tāṇḍavānvitaṁ |
viśvavajradharaṁ  mūrdhni k r̥ṣṇavarṇabhayānakaṁ ||
hūṁkāraṁ  sphārayen mukhād bhasmoddhūlitavigrahaṁ |
ratidvandvasamāpannaṁ nairātmyā saha saṁyutaṁ ||91
‘… eight-faced, four-footed, adorned with sixteen arms, 
trampling the four M āras, terrifying even to terror itself, 
not a Buddha but a human being who would have 
commissioned the ritual for which the gold foil was 
produced. If so, it may have been the same person as 
the senāpati  Dīpaṅkara of the Porlak Dolok inscription 
(§1.1.4). See also the discussion below, p. 238.
88 I am not sure of the reading here. Hevajratantra  2.5.47 
reads only gr̥hna gr ̥hna śatrūn .
89 Photos OD-10591–10592. See Reichle 2007, igs. 5.1–
2. See also Bautze-Picron, in this volume, p. 111–2.
90 See B. Bhattacharya 1958: 155. See also Sanderson 
2009: 148–150, on the iconographical features and the 
name of this deity.
91 With variant readings, the same verses also occur in 
Ratnākaraśānti’s Bhramaharanāma­Hevajrasādhana  
(ed. Isaacson 2002b: 164). My translation implies 
emendation to hūṁkārasphārayanmukhaṁ , after the 
variant hūṁkārasphārivadanaṁ  in the parallel text.

--- [Page 27] ---
230Arlo Grifiths
wearing a necklace of a garland of skulls, engaged in dance 
on top of the sun, bearing at/above (?) [my] head a viśvavajra , 
terrifying by [my] black color, [my] faces discharging the 
sound hūm̐, [my] body sprinkled with ash, endowed with  
sensuality and strife (?), joined with Nairātmyā …’
The brandishing of a viśvavajra  and the dis-
charging of the sound hūm̐ are obviously impor-
tant characteristics of Hevajra, and we will see 
these two features abstractly represented also 
on another artifact to be discussed below ( §3) as 
also on non-inscribed objects from Padang Lawas 
that are discussed in Claudine Bautze-Picron’s 
contribution to this volume. 
Further on in the same chapter of the Tantra 
(Hevajratantra  2.5.45–47), we then ind a 
description of his ‘root-mantra’ ( mūlamantra ), of 
which the irst Padang Lawas plaque clearly gives 
a direct quote, written in the round, but preserving 
only a part due to loss of an adjoining inscribed 
surface. I indicate here the parts of the Tantra 
preserved on the plaques using bold face for 6146 
(the irst line being a description of the akṣara om̐) 
and underlining for 6149:
vedānām ādimaṁ caivārdhendubindubhūṣitaṁ  |
paścād aṣṭāna nāyeti piṅgordhvakeśavartmane | 
caturviṁśatinetrāya tadanu  ṣoḍaśabhujāya |
kr̥ṣṇajīmūtavapu ṣe kapālamālāneka dhāriṇe |
adhmātakrūracittāya92 ardhendudaṁṣṭriṇe ||
māraya māraya kāraya kāra ya garjaya garjaya 
tarjaya tarjaya śoṣaya śoṣaya sapta sāgarān bandha 
bandha  nāgāṣṭakān gr ̥hna gr ̥hna śatrūn ha hā hi hī hu 
hū he hai ho hau haṁ haḥ phaṭ svāhā ||
‘[The mūlamantra  comprises] the irst (akṣara) of the Vedas 
adorned with a half moon and a dot (i.e. the syllable om̐), then 
aṣṭānanāya … caturviṁśatinetrāya and then ṣoḍaśabhujāya 
… svāhā  [which words mean: To the eight-faced one, the one 
who has tawny and (upward-)streaming strands of hair,  the 
twenty-four-eyed one, the sixteen-armed one, whose face is 
92 adhmātakrūracittāya : adhyāntakrūra°  ed. Snellgrove. 
The correction was pointed out to me by Harunaga 
Isaacson: “ adhyāntakrūracittāya  should be read rather 
as a dhmā takrūracittāya  (this too is a stock expression 
in the descriptions of Hevajra). Ratnākaraśānti has a 
few glosses on the compound: adhmātaṁ sadarpam . 
krū raṁ baddhakrodham . So ‘he whose mind is proud 
and furious’ or something like that”.like a black cloud, who bears a garland of numerous skulls, 
whose mind is proud and furious, who has a half moon as 
his tusk — māraya māraya kāraya kāraya garjaya garjaya 
tarjaya tarjaya  dry-up, dry-up the seven oceans! Bind, bind 
the eight serpents! Capture, capture the enemies! ha hā hi hī 
hu hū he hai ho hau haṁ haḥ phaṭ svāhā !]’
As Harunaga Isaacson points out to me, 
the fact that our irst plaque cites also tadanu, 
which actually is not part of the mantra, proves 
unequivocally that the mantra is being taken 
directly from this chapter of the Tantra, thus 
furnishing strong evidence that the text itself 
was transmitted and read in Padang Lawas.93 In 
the outer lines of the circle (7–9), we then see 
other elements whose textual source I have thus 
far not yet been able to trace. The plaque MNI 
6149 only cites a smaller part of the mūlamantra , 
speciically its hortative part.
Elsewhere in the Hevajratantra , there are 
instructions for the ritual application of the letter 
hūm̐ and its placement within a viśvavajra , but 
we get there only the very bare bones of ritual 
practice. For a more concrete notion of how we 
may imagine these two plaques from Padang 
Lawas would have been used, and possibly even 
for a precise determination of the ritual tradition 
that guided their manufacture and furnished the 
outer lines of plaque MNI 6146, we would have to 
turn to the Sanskrit ritual manuals in the Hevajra 
tradition. It is a lucky coincidence that these 
have started to be made available to scholars by 
Harunaga Isaacson in a series of articles published 
since 2001.94 But a deeper exploration of these 
texts is beyond the scope of this contribution.95
93 Schoterman (1986: 13) has cited evidence from the 
Hevajratantra  itself that shows that Sumatra was 
home to one of the places of pilgrimage it lists. On the 
problem of the extent to which citation inscriptions are 
capable of proving that the revealed texts being cited 
were known as such at the time and place of citation, 
see Grifiths 2011: 171.See also Grifiths 2014a.
94 See the articles referred to in n. 84.
95 In connection with these two inscriptions citing the 
Hevajratantra  and its bīja-mantra, it may be useful 
to refer to the inscription hūm̐ on the bottom part of 
two ritual spikes ( kīla) recovered from Java. Cf. Balai 
Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala Yogyakarta 2007, 

--- [Page 28] ---
231Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
1.2.3:  gold foil from Si Pamutung (ig. 9)
Also known as: —.
Dimensions: 4.3 × 1.5 cm.
Material: gold.
Provenance: Candi Si Pamutung, Perwara C.
Present location: Museum Negeri Provinsi Sumatra Utara, 
without inv. no.
Language/Script: n.a., Nāgarī, engraved.
Date: ca 13th c.
Publication history: unpublished.
Available reproductions: photos furnished by Museum 
Negeri Provinsi Sumatra Utara.
The inscription comprises the single akṣara 
yam̐, clearly as a bīja-mantra. It is inscribed at 
the center of a circular design of which the foil in 
question preserves only a segment, as in the case 
of the inscription MNI 6146 from Aek Sangkilon 
treated just above. It does not seem impossible 
that the patterns of lines to the left of the akṣara are 
intended to represent (part of) a vajra motif. If so, 
the foil would be distinctly comparable to the two 
preceding items. This possibility is heightened by 
the fact — pointed out to me by Iain Sinclair — 
that we ind prescriptions in Vajrayāna texts of 
the early second millennium for the meditation on 
the seed-syllable yam̐ circumposed by a double 
vajra, in universe-instantiating meditation at the 
outset of ritual. In such cases it would be the irst 
of at least four syllables, each associated with a 
different sphere of the cosmos. Cf. Piṇḍīkrama  
1.18–21:
ākāśadhātumadhyasthaṁ bhāvayed vāyumaṇḍalam | 
dvihūm ̐ yam̐bījaniṣpannaṁ vajradvayasamāyutam ||
agnimaṇḍalakaṁ cāpi tasyopari vibhāvayet | 
dvihūm ̐ ram̐bījaniṣpannaṁ vajradvayasamāṅkitam || 
vārimaṇḍalakaṁ cāpi tasyopari vibhāvayet | 
dvihūm ̐ vam̐bījaniṣpannaṁ vajradvayasamāyutam ||
pr̥thvīmaṇḍalakaṁ cāpi tasyopari vibhāvayet | 
pp. 114–115, and JBG 2 (1934), pp. 108 and 118. 
Cf. also the contribution of Claudine Bautze-Picron to 
this volume (p. 114–5) for more on this type of artefact.dvihūṁ lam ̐bījaniṣpannaṁ vajradvayasamanvitam || 96
‘He should meditate on a wind-disc, placed at the center of 
the element of ether, emerging from the seed [syllable] yam̐ 
with two hūm̐ [sounds] and joined with a pair of vajras. And 
on top of that he should visualize a ire-disc emerging from 
the seed [syllable] ram̐ with two hūm̐ [sounds] and marked 
by a pair of vajras. And on top of that he should visualize a 
water-disc emerging from the seed [syllable] ram̐ with two 
hūm̐ [sounds] and joined with a pair of vajras. And on top 
of that he should visualize an earth-disc emerging from the 
seed [syllable] lam̐ with two hūm̐ [sounds] and joined with 
a pair of vajras.’
It seems likely that the gold foil under discussion 
is a remainder of a physical representation of this 
kind of visualization of the cosmos.
1.3. Two inscribed lion statues
Two remarkably similar inscribed lion statues 
were recovered from the two shrines currently 
known as Tandihat I and II. The proximity of 
the sites as well as the uniqueness of the fact of 
engraving of text on lion statues is such that there 
may be reason to doubt whether the recorded 
provenance from two different shrines is correct, 
and to consider the possibility that the two statues 
formed a pair in one monument. On the other 
hand, as we will see, the two inscriptions were 
quite possibly identical, and this may plead for 
their appertaining to two separate monuments.
96 Ed. L. de la Vallée Poussin (1896). On these verses, 
and the kind of ritual of maṇḍala construction that 
they imply, see Muniśrībhadra’s commentary edited by 
Zhongxin Jiang & Toru Tomabecchi (1995), p. 14. The 
editors estimate  (pp. xiv–xv) that Muniśrībhadra was 
active around 1200 ce.

--- [Page 29] ---
232Arlo Grifiths
1.3.1: Inscribed lion sculpture from Tandihat II 
(ig. 10a, 10b)
Also known as: —.
Dimensions: 48 × 32 × 45 cm.
Material: tuff stone.
Provenance: Biaro Tandihat II.
Present location: Museum Negeri Provinsi Sumatra Utara, 
no. 1943.
Language/Script: Old Malay in Palaeosumatran script.
Date: ca 12th century ce.
Publication history: described in Hasanuddin et al. 1994/95: 
57; edited with eye-copy by Rita M.S.  & Sri Hartini 
(2002: 11–14); repeated in Rita M.S. et al. 2003: no. 3, 
p. 8–9; previous publications summarized by Perret et al. 
(2007: 55); inventoried PPS-SBU 10, p. 98.
Available reproductions: photos in all the mentioned 
publications except Perret et al. 2007; estampages EFEO 
n. 1861 and 1862.
This edition: based on inspection of the stone and the EFEO 
estampage n. 1862.
Text and translation
buddha biśvakarmma97
‘The Buddha as All-creator’
1.3.2: Fragment of an inscribed lion sculpture 
from Tandihat I (ig. 11)
Also known as: —.
Dimensions: 10 × 21 cm.
Material: probably tuff stone.
Provenance: Biaro Si Joreng Belangah = Tandihat I.
Present location: Museum Nasional, Jakarta, inv. no. D. 166, 
but not yet traced there.
Language/Script: Old Malay in Palaeosumatran script.
Date: ca 12th century ce.
Publication history: stone described in JBG 3 (1936: 199);98 
97 biśvakarmma : this was read i svakarmma by Rita 
Margareta Setianingsih, a wrong reading disseminated 
in several publications.
98 “D 166 Fragment van een leeuweniguur  met twee korte 
regels onduidelijk oud-Jav. schrift tusschen de pooten. 
H. 10, br. 21 cm. Afk. als boven.” See the citation under 
§1.1.4, n. 54.location in the site described by Schnitger (1937: 19);99 
previous publications summarized by Perret et al. (2007: 
54); inscription unpublished.
Available reproductions: Photo UB Leiden P-045435 (the 
text is here shown upside down).100
This edition: based on the photo in Leiden.
Text
(1) (kuṇḍu) [bi-]
(2) śvakarmma
Commentary
A misreading of the inscription on the irst lion 
as buddha i svakarmma  (ostensibly with the Old 
Javanese preposition i) has led to the mistaken 
claim that the language of the inscription would 
be Old Javanese. The correct reading is buddha 
biśvakarmma , which seems to be a label of some 
kind comprised of two Sanskrit words, but without 
any Sanskrit inlection, so we must presume they 
were here used borrowed into a non-inlecting 
vernacular language. Since there is no vernacular 
morphology to help make any distinction, we 
must assume that the locally dominant language 
was intended here, and that language was Malay.
The idea that the Buddha is called biśva­
karmma, a variant spelling for the Sanskrit word 
vi śva kar ma , meaning ‘All-creator’ or ‘Perfor-
ming all acts’, is known to me only from a stanza 
in the Sarva dur ga tipariśodhanatantra , in a sec-
tion dealing with the arrangement of mantras in 
the maṇḍala of the Buddha called Sarvadurga-
ti  pa ri śo dhanarāja ‘King who elimi nates all evil 
desti nies’ alias Śākyasiṁha:
99 “In the northeast corner of the courtyard the fragments 
of a lion were found; the face is hewn from a separate 
piece of stone and its into the head with a peg; on the 
left and right sides, above the cheeks, two holes are 
bored; on the breast are two short lines of illegible old 
Javanese script. Evidently there was formerly a second 
lion. These animals lanked the temple steps.”
100 See n. 56 above.

--- [Page 30] ---
233Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
uttare cakra ārasthapadmoparīndumaṇḍale ||
avatīrya hr ̥dayād buddho viśvoṣṇīṣas tathā gataḥ ||
haritavarṇaprabhājvālyo mudrā cāsyābhaya pradaḥ ||
viśvakarma karo buddhaḥ  sattvān saṁsārād uttaret ||
‘The Tathāgata Viśvoṣṇīṣa, the Buddha, emerges from 
the heart on a lunar disc resting on a lotus placed on a 
northern  spoke. He is full of splendor, his body is of green 
color, and he makes the gesture of fearlessness. Performing 
all the acts of the Buddha he liberates living beings from 
saṁsāra.’101
The name Śākyasiṁha ‘Lion of the Śākyas’ 
occurs several times in the text, but clearly refers to 
the central Buddha of the maṇḍala who is distinct 
from the northern Buddha Viśvoṣṇīṣa while it is 
only the latter who is said to be viśvakarmakara  
‘performing all acts’.102  I am unable to evaluate 
the likelihood that the phraseological agreement 
with this Tantra is historically signiicant, and 
if so, in what manner. Nor can I adduce any 
explanation of why these two words would have 
been engraved on the small lion’s leg.103
The reading kuṇḍu  for the irst two akṣaras 
of the second lion cannot be established with 
certainty on the basis of the available visual 
documentation. As it stands, this reading does not 
yield a translatable word in any relevant language. 
It cannot be excluded that the two akṣaras, 
although they look rather different from the irst 
two akṣaras on the left paw of the other lion, were 
intended to form the same akṣaras buddha . The 
akṣara [ bi] is restored in the part broken off at 
the end of line 1, which clearly could have given 
place for no more than one akṣara, on the basis of 
the fact that śvakarmma  in line 2 can hardly have 
been preceded by any other akṣara (except the 
equivalent vi). All in all it seems fairly likely that 
the text on the second lion was identical to that on 
the irst. If indeed the texts are identical and if there 
is some connection with the above-quoted text, 
101 Ed. T. Skorupski (1983), p. 164 ll. 28–31; transl. p. 28.
102 See also p. 158, ll. 6–7 vs. 15–16 in Skorupski’s edition.
103 It is remarkable that the idea of inscribing a lion’s leg 
has apparently found wider appeal in Southeast Asia. 
There is a still unpublished Khmer inscription on a leg 
of a life-size lion held at the Conservation d’Angkor  
under n° 614. The inscription has been registered 
as K. 1268. I owe this information and photos to 
Dominique Soutif.which assigns the Buddha Viśvoṣṇīṣa to the north 
of the maṇḍala, then it may not be coincidental 
that this second lion was, according to Schnitger’s 
report (n. 99), found in the northeast corner of the 
courtyard of Tandihat I. And in that case, the fact 
that the two statues bear the same text could mean 
that they were intended for identical positions in 
two different temple groundplans, hence indeed 
belonged to two different temples.
2. Sorik Merapi
The site of Sorik Merapi lies on top of volcano 
Sorik Merapi (altitude 2140 m, 0°41’10” N, 
99°32’20” E) in the regency Mandailing Natal of 
North Sumatra, outside of Padang Lawas, but no 
more than about 50 km (as the crow lies) from 
the site of Porlak Dolok, near the Dolok (mount) 
Si Balangga, part of the next range eastward (see 
map, p. 31). The epigraphical remains from the 
site date from a period that overlaps with the 
epigraphical production in Padang Lawas. The 
proximity of the site to the southern reaches of 
Padang Lawas, from which it is separated by the 
valley of the Batang Angkola river and a single 
easily traversed mountain range, make it likely 
that the epigraphical remains of the site have 
close connections with those of Padang Lawas.
Very little is known about the site of Sorik 
Merapi aside from the inscribed artefacts that 
it has yielded. Already by the late 19th century, 
the artifacts in question had all been moved 
to the Museum of the Batavian Society (now 
the National Museum), where the stones were 
assigned the number D. 53, D. 65, D. 84 and D. 
85. It has been reported that the site situated on the 
top of the volcano Sorik Merapi was once home to 
three sepulchers of red brick, of which two in the 
crater have disappeared after an eruption, while 
the same eruption led to the third one opening 
up, whereupon a yellow brown urn of baked clay 
was found, showing traces of ash. It was moved 
to the Museum in Batavia and inventoried there 
under the number 793b. Nothing else seems to be 
known from or about the site.104
104 In fact, the provenance of one of the inscribed stones 
is not positively recorded, but it was assumed by 

--- [Page 31] ---
234Arlo Grifiths
By their palaeography, and also by a date 
which has been read on one of them but which 
I have not (yet) been able to verify, we may 
situate these short inscriptions in the 12th–13th 
century range. As expected, the language is Old 
Malay, although there is one case of intrusion of a 
Sanskrit verb from.
D. 53 (ig. 12a, 12b)105
|| °anumodanānda mahaśenāpati pamānan· 
bhagi [°ib]unda dara panu gharininda śri106 
°ampuku kalus·107 || haṁ108 jayasu
‘Gift of the great general Pamanan for 
his mother Dara Panu, consort of milord the 
illustrious Kalus Hang Jayasu...’.
D. 65 (ig. 13a, 13b)109
//110 °anumodanānda mahāsenāpati 
pamānan· °ekalabira bhagi °anakda 
prajñavardhani111
‘Gift of the great general Pamanan 
Ekalabira for his daughter Prajñavardhanī’.
Brandes, for good reason, that all four come from the 
same site. For a bibliographic listing, see Krom 1914: 
108. The information I have reported is compiled from 
the sources referred to there, to which Brandes 1920: 
122 must be added.
105 See Brandes 1913: 265, no. CLVI; published in Brandes 
1920: 122. Dimensions: height 22, upper diameter 10, 
lower 19 cm.
106 śri: śrī Brandes.
107 kalus : kūlus Brandes.
108 haṁ: it would be equally possible to read yaṁ.
109 See Brandes 1913: 265, no. CLV; published Brandes 
1920: 122. Dimensions: height 56 cm, max. 
circumference 83 cm.
110 //: there is at least one sign at the beginning of the text 
left unread by Brandes. If not a liminal sign, we may 
have the word °ini ‘this’ here, although what remains 
visible on stone and estampage does not really support 
such a reading. It rather seems that we have here a sign 
similar to that observed on D. 85.
111 °vardhani : °vardhanī Brandes.D. 84 (ig. 14a, 14b)112
svasti śakavarśa °atita 1164113 bulan asuji 
śuklapakṣa trayodaśi maṅgalavara sana 
tatakala caitya bhagi sira
‘Hail. Elapsed Śaka year 1164, month of 
Aśvinī, waxing fortnight, thirteenth [ tithi], a 
Tuesday. At that time a caitya for …’
D. 85  (ig. 15a, 15b)114
// caitya bhagi dara nayana115 
samyakaśam·buddhanāṁ116 bhavati //
‘A caitya for Dara Nayana. She is 
completely awakened.’117
112 See Brandes 1913: 265, no. CLIII; published Brandes 
1920: 122. Dimensions of the object: height 18 cm, max. 
circumference 71 cm. See NBG  29 (1891), p. 84 on the 
original shape of the object, described as “fragment-
paaltje”, that is with the same descriptive term as that 
used for D. 85: the latter object in fact shows a rather 
different shape. No trace of any akṣaras is currently 
visible on D. 84, and the estampages available in Leiden 
(classiied as D. 85, along with an estampage of the 
Javanese inscription which is actually MNI D. 58) are 
not legible either. So I have not been able to verify the 
published readings. Is a part of the object lost, or has all 
legibility faded away? Cf. Brandes, NBG  29, p. 84: “De 
legende op den eersten steen (no. 84), in twee regels, 
is, doordat de onderste regel vlak boven de rand staat, 
waardoor het bovengedeelte der letters staande is, 
maar de voet ervan juist even ligt, onduidelijk. Slechts 
enkele karakters van dien tweeden regel zijn daardoor 
goed te zien, te weinig om de tusschenliggende letter te 
bepalen.”
113 1164 : thus Damais (1952: 100–101 n. 4), 1294 Bosch 
(1930: 146), 1(1/2)9(4/5)  Brandes.
114 See Brandes 1913: 265, no. CLIV; published Brandes 
1920: 122. Engraved on a miniature stūpa : height 
25.5 cm, circumference at inscribed band 63.5. The 
estampage for this inscription is classiied as D. 84 in 
Leiden.
115 dara nayana : one could also read dara naghana  or 
daranasena .
116 samyakaśam· : understand samyaksam °. Brandes reads 
sampangkaśam °.
117 As in D. 53, the name with Dara probably indicated a 
woman (see Brandes 1920: 122). The interpretation of 
the phrase samyakśam·buddhanāṁ bhavati, apparently 
corrupt Sanskrit, is very uncertain. Alternatively, one 
might consider translating ‘The caitya is for Dara 
Nayana, for [her] complete awakening’.

--- [Page 32] ---
235Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Commentary
Among other things by their use of the 
typically Buddhist terms anumodana  and caitya, 
these inscriptions add signiicantly to what 
we learn from the Padang Lawas inscriptions. 
Through a semantic process that is not yet 
precisely understood, the Buddhist technical 
term anumodanā  (apparently synonymous with 
anumoda and anumodana ) has come to denote, at 
least in some Indonesian Buddhist inscriptions, a 
type of pious gift.118
Regarding the use of the term caitya — which 
can in certain contexts denote the same thing as 
the word stūpa119 —, it is important to keep in 
mind the possibility that the former sepulchers 
marking the site where the inscriptions were found 
were large-sized stūpas, and that the inscriptions 
themselves have been engraved on artefacts more 
or less clearly identiiable as miniature stūpas.120 
Gregory Schopen has pointed out for Buddhist 
sites in India a remarkable archaeological pattern:
The archaeological record of Buddhist sacred 
sites exhibits, then, from the very beginning 
of our actual evidence, at least one curious but 
consistent pattern. This pattern, signiicantly, is 
most distinctly and directly visible at what are our 
very earliest undisturbed sites. The Dharmarājikā 
at Taxila, which dates to the second century b.c.e., 
is a ine example. […] It continues to hold through 
the 4th and 5th centuries c.e.—for example, at 
Jauliāñ and Mīrpūr-Khas—and is found still in 
118 See the elaborate discussion by de Casparis (1958: 
15–18) of the numerous short inscriptions recording 
anumoda  at Candi Plaosan Lor (Java, 9th century), 
and the meaning of this term in Buddhist Sanskrit 
texts. In the Old Malay inscription on the socle of the 
Amoghapāśa of Padang Roco (see Krom 1916), we 
read on the front face, in line 4, the passive verb form 
di°anumodanā/a . Its translation is not certain: it might 
either mean ‘approved of’ or ‘given as gift’.
119 See e.g. Schopen 1989 on this point, more speciically, 
on the contextual equivalence of Pali cetiya (= Sanskrit 
caitya) with stūpa.
120 See the various types shown and discussed in van 
Lohuizen-de Leeuw 1980, where the Sorik Merapi 
artefacts are, however, not mentioned.its full disorderly effervescence in the tenth and 
twelfth centuries at Ratnagiri. What we ind is a 
large central structure which marks one of two 
things: either the presence of a spot that was 
formerly in direct contact with the physical body 
of the Buddha, or—more commonly—the presence 
of an actual physical piece of that body. Around 
this structure are closely packed in increasing 
disorder a large number—increasingly so—of 
other smaller structures that frequently contain 
anonymous bones or bone ash or other items 
connected with mortuary deposits.  (Schopen 
1987: 200–201, emphasis added)
Such miniature stūpas, or caityas, have not 
been recovered from Sumatra in great numbers. 
But some of them have also not been recognized 
as what they are.121 The base of the miniature stūpa 
from Sorik Merapi that is now MNI D. 65 — not 
called caitya ! — has a cavern (ig. 13a), which we 
may, in light of the Indian evidence, suppose once 
held the physical remains of lady Prajñavardhanī. 
If this assumption about the function of the cavern 
is correct, we may conclude that the donations 
here termed caitya or anumodanā  both took the 
form of the post mortem  creation of miniature 
stūpas to hold the ashes of the deceased. It is a 
remarkable fact that, to the extent any indications 
have been preserved (i.e. not on MNI D. 84), all 
of the beneiciaries of these donations are women, 
as the Malay terms ibu and dara indicate.122
121 See Satyawati Suleiman 1954 [1985]: 33–34 and van 
Lohuizen-de Leeuw 1980: 284–285 on the so-called 
stambhas of Padang Lawas, some or all of which may 
actually be considered to be stūpas. For a variety of 
examples at roughly the same scale slightly further 
aield, from the Malay Peninsula, see Michel Jacq-
Hergoualc’h 2002, igs. 67–68, 144, 165 (also, at 
smaller and larger scales, 61, 83–84, 150). Schopen 
1987 has — to my mind convincingly — argued against 
the terminology ‘votive stūpa’ that we still see used by 
Jacq-Hergoualc’h, and that is also retained by Claudine 
Bautze-Picron in her contribution to this volume.
122 Perhaps there is a connection with the ‘matriarchy’ 
which 19th-century Dutch scholars found through large 
tracts in this part of Sumatra? Cf. Wilken 1888.

--- [Page 33] ---
236Arlo Grifiths
3. Muara Takus in Riau province
Further still from Padang Lawas, but clearly 
connected with that region as well as the higher 
reaches of the Rokan basin by numerous cultural-
historical ties,123 is the site Muara Takus on the 
upper Kampar river in Riau province (0°20’09” 
N, 100°38’32” E). The site appears to date from 
the same period as the monuments of Padang 
Lawas.124 Its inscriptions125 of the ancient period 
all belong to the category of mantra inscriptions 
that was discussed for Padang Lawas in §1.2 
above, where I have presented three gold foils, 
two of which unmistakably display viśvavajra s. 
Among the Muara Takus inscriptions is a 
stone artefact bearing the viśvavajra  motif with 
the akṣara hūm̐ at its center, this time surrounded 
by so-called seed ( bīja) akṣaras, again all written 
in Nāgarī script, forming a diagram of characters 
(yantra) whose meaning or function is unknown 
to me. For the time being, I only have access to an 
old photograph (ig. 16). It allows the following 
reading:126
123 See also Uli Kozok’s contribution to this volume on the 
shared Batak epigraphical remains of Padang Lawas 
and Muara Takus.
124 See van Lohuizen-de Leeuw 1980: 285.
125 Machi Suhadi (1988: 175, with n. 29) mentioned the 
existence of inscriptions comprising bījas at this site, 
and later reported on the discovery in 1985 of the fourth 
inscription presented below (1989: 115). Despite the 
availability of these recent Indonesian publications, 
none of the inscriptions from this site were inventoried 
by Bambang Budi Utomo (2007). See my observation 
(Grifiths 2011: 145, n. 13; 164, with n. 44) on the 
neglect of Machi Suhadi’s publications in this inventory, 
which in fact ignores the epigraphy of Riau province 
altogether. I should also mention here that another 
mantra inscription has been found at Tanjung Medan 
(PPS-SBT 29, p. 84), nearby the aforementioned Old 
Malay inscription of Lubuk Layang. These inscriptions 
found in West Sumatra province are excluded from 
discussion here mainly because I intend to treat them 
in my monograph on the inscriptions of Ādityavarman 
that currently is in state of preparation. 
126 The stone in question was discovered in 1889 and 
entered the collection of the Museum in Batavia in 1890 
as D. 72. See NBG 27 (1889), p. 155–148; 28 (1890), 
p. 14; 47 (1911), p. LXXXIII. Also Krom 1912, no. 8b. mam̐ hrīm̐ pam̐
tram̐ hūm̐ ṇam̐
lam̐ °om̐ tam̐
At least one other similar object from the same 
site is known but not yet properly published. 
Only a part of the original is preserved, but we 
recognize again a viśvavajra , again with bījas 
arranged in what seems to be a grid of nine, 
although the orientation is here circular, the script 
seems to be a mixture of Nāgarī and Kawi, and 
the bījas, of which only four remain, are different 
(ig. 17):
gam̐ hrīḥ —
śam̐ °om̐ —
— — —127
Two further Buddhist inscriptions have been 
reported from the same site. The irst was a gold 
plaque on which, according to the discoverer 
IJzerman, “triçoelas were carved at upper and 
lower end” of the following letter signs, written 
in Nāgarī:
The photo at my disposal is held in the Rijksmuseum 
voor V olkenkunde at Leiden, inv. no. 1403-3712. My 
reading is rather different from the reading by IJzerman 
cited in NBG 27, p. 157:
mam̐ dram ̐ pam̐
rum̐ hram ̐ yam̐
lam̐ °um̐ tam̐
127 The eye-copy shown by Machi Suhadi (1989: 129) is 
a drawing of the stone MNI D. 72 (see the preceding 
note), and does not seem to correspond to the brick 
marked with a viśvavajra  and said to be inscribed 
“among others” by the bījas “mum, jum, wang, hung 
and gum” in the same article (1989: 115). According 
to Machi Suhadi (1988: 179f., notes 9 and 29), these 
akṣaras would be found on a brick excavated between 
1979 and 1985 and held on the site. I believe his brick 
is the one currently held in the Provincial Museum of 
Riau in Pekan Baru. The photograph I use was taken 
by Daniel Perret in 2004. Only four bījas are visible 
and none of Suhadi’s readings can be conirmed. 
Nevertheless it seems most likely that we are dealing 
with a single brick.

--- [Page 34] ---
237Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
ram̐
hram̐
kham̐
By triśūla s IJzerman certainly meant what 
we would now consider as eminently Buddhist 
vajra prongs.128 The present whereabouts of the 
plaque are unknown and no image is known to me 
to exist, so neither the presence of vajras nor the 
readings can be veriied.129
The same complex has also yielded a stone 
(or brick?) inscribed in 11th–13th-century Palaeo-
sumatran script with the following mantra 
(ig. 18):130
 (1) °oṁ °āḥ bighnantakr ̥ hūm̐ phaṭ·
 (2)  svahā
128 Quite possibly they resembled the vajra symbols on the 
gold foils from Muara Jambi that I have published in 
Grifiths 2011: 159–161, no. 8, with ig. 8 on p. 163.
129 See NBG  27 (1889), p. 157 and Krom 1912: 38, no. 8a. 
According to Krom, this should be MNI 785b. But this 
number corresponds to a gold plaque from a different 
site in Groeneveldt’s catalogue. It is unclear what then 
is the basis for the dimensions cited by Krom (for these 
too are different from the ones indicated for MNI 785b 
by Groeneveldt). In NBG  27, p. 158, it is stated: “Wordt 
besloten ... het gouden plaatje in de betrekkelijke 
verzameling op te nemen”, but the plaque does not 
igure in the appendix XI of the same volume, listing 
the objects obtained for the archaeological collection in 
1889. In NBG  28 (1890), p. 14, there is a list of objects 
sent by IJzerman from Candi Bungsu. The inscribed 
stone from Candi Bungsu  (D. 72), mentioned above, 
is among them, while the plaque is not, and again it is 
not listed among the new objects in this volume. There 
may be reason to doubt the plaque ever entered the 
collection in Batavia. At least no veriiable information 
is known to me about it after the publication in NBG 27 
(1889). No image seems ever to have been produced 
for this object.
130 Published by Machi Suhadi (1989: 115, with a fairly 
good eye-copy on p. 132). His reading was: oṃ āḥ 
bighnanta kṛ hrĕng phad swāhā . The artifact, said 
to be in batu padas (tuff stone), is currently held in 
the Provincial Museum of Riau in Pekan Baru. The 
photograph which I use was taken by Daniel Perret in 
2004.This is a variant of a mantra for  Amr ̥takuṇḍa-
li(n), a protective deity not unrelated to Kubera 
and Vināyaka (Gaṇeśa), who seems generally to 
reside in the North of the maṇḍala where he is 
installed. The particular amr̥takuṇḍalimantra  of 
which we have a variant here131 is known from 
various ritual manuals in Sanskrit, such as the 
Vighnāntakasādhana  in the Sādhanamālā ,132 and 
in Abhayākaragupta’s Vajrāvalī (ca 1100 ce),133 
but no close variant is attested, as far as I know, 
in any scriptural source. Besides the minor point 
that svahā stands for svāhā, it should be noted 
that the correct version of this mantra, as seen in 
the mentioned manuals, reads vighnāntakr ̥t hūm ̐. 
Since this mantra was apparently used in more 
than one tradition, it is not helpful to pin down the 
practice of any particular school at Muara Takus, 
but we may suppose that other similar stones 
were placed in the cardinal direction of the same 
monument where this one was found, and there is 
some reason to expect that this one was found on 
the northern side.134
131 According to a personal communication from 
Harunaga Isaacson, “we usually have it without the 
inal svāhā though (and sometimes without the phaṭ 
as well, i.e. ending with hūṁ).” My thanks to him and 
to Ron Davidson for their comments on the Sanskrit 
sources for this mantra. Rolf Giebel adds that the 
mantra oṁ amr ̥takuṇḍali vighnāntaka hūṁ  appears in 
the Chinese (and presumably Tibetan) translation of 
the Māyājālamahātantra , where it is called the ‘mantra 
of the vidyārāja (king of spells) Vighnāntaka’.
132 V ol. 2, p. 559, l. 3 of B. Bhattacharya’s edition (1968).
133 E.g. in its Pratimādyarghavidhi section, dealing i.a. 
with a monk who ‘wishes to restore what is dilapidated 
in a monastery etc.’ ( khaṇḍasphuṭitavihārādikaṁ 
punaḥ saṁskartukāmaḥ  — cf. von Hinüber 2009: 
163–164 on expressions of this type), or in its 
Devatādhivāsanavidhi . See ed. Masahide Mori 2009, 
§1.3.2 and §16.3.
134 No precisions of the location where it was found are 
known to me, and it is unlikely that these have been 
recorded. The explicit textual associations of the 
mantra with the North that I have seen are, i.a., in 
Padmaśrīmitra’s Maṇḍalopāyikā (prose after st. 143, 
f. 3v10, transliteration of ms. 280 preserved in the 
Tokyo University Library by Ryugen Tanemura) and 
in Dīpaṁkarabhadra’s Guhyasamājamaṇḍalavidhi  (st. 
85, e-text provided at www.tantric-studies.org).

--- [Page 35] ---
238Arlo Grifiths
III. HISTORICAL SYNTHESIS
yielded the name Rakan, which probably denoted 
another political entity, most likely in the upper 
reaches of the Rokan river basin, not far from the 
site where the inscription was found. Previous 
scholars have lamented the lack of names of rulers, 
so that even a beginning of dynastic history has 
been impossible. This situation remains basically 
unchanged. However, the inscriptions of Gunung 
Tua and Porlak Dolok, the four inscriptions of 
Sorik Merapi as well as the two inscriptions of 
Si Topayan yield several personal names both 
sanskritic and local, mostly of the donors whose 
donations it was the purpose of the inscriptions 
to record. Two of these donors bore the rank 
senāpati or even mahāsenāpati , Sanskrit words 
originally meaning ‘(great) general’. The Tamil 
inscription of Barus (1088 ce) records a donation 
involving a nakarasenāpati , who is here recipient 
of a donation, and whose rank has been interpreted 
by Subbarayalu (1998: 30) to mean ‘captain of 
the town’. The striking density of senāpatis in 
the land donations of Northern Sumatra, coupled 
with the total absence of names of royalty, indeed 
raises the question whether the term always 
implies a military role for the one who bore it, 
or else whether the function of senāpati may 
have had a greater political importance than the 
name suggests. In contemporary inscriptions of 
Campā, for instance, the rank of mahāsenāpati  
seems to be associated with that of heir apparent 
(yuvarāja), and comparison of the Porlak Dolok 
inscription (§1.1.4) with the Lubuk Layang 
inscription cited on p. 221 might suggest that the 
title senāpati and a name in ° śekhara indicated 
the heir apparent in North Sumatra as well; in the 
late 13th-century Khmer inscription on the Grahi 
Buddha from southern Thailand, a igure with the 
rank of mahāsenāpati  seems to act as governor 
(Cœdès 1918: 34–35; de Casparis 1967); in 
Balinese inscriptions, on the other hand, the 
senāpati  appears to denote igures with a juridical 
function.136
136 The role of the senāpati  in the Old Malay Telaga Batu / 
Sabokingkin inscription, line 3 (de Casparis 1956: 32) The epigraphical documents presented in 
the preceding part can roughly be grouped into 
three classes: mantra citation inscriptions, yantra 
inscriptions comprising only bīja, i.e. ‘seed’ 
mantras, and donation inscriptions. The primary 
language is Old Malay, which is indeed almost 
universally the language of expression in donation 
inscriptions on this island.135 Sanskrit is reserved 
for mantra inscriptions and for a pithy formula that 
concludes one inscription otherwise formulated in 
Old Malay. There is one case of the use of Tamil 
language. The script is mostly Palaeosumatran; 
Nāgarī (a script associated with Northern India) 
is only used for Buddhist mantras and yantras, 
and hence only for Sanskrit; that language can 
equally well be and is indeed often written in 
Palaeosumatran script. Tamil is always written in 
Tamil script, and Tamil script is only used for Tamil 
language. The inscriptions are often internally 
dated or dateable within a one or two century 
range on palaeographic grounds, and, in the near 
total absence of archaeological indings dated by 
association with ceramics or on the basis of C14 
analysis (or other natural science methods), are of 
vital importance for estimating the chronological 
position of the sites and artifacts with which they 
are associated. The inscriptions span several 
centuries, from the 11th through possibly as late 
as the 15th century; the earliest and latest recorded 
exact dates fall in 1039 and (possibly) 1261 ce. 
Socio-political and ethnic history
One of the most recently discovered inscrip-
tions has yielded the irst local attestation of the 
name Paṇai, which was already assumed to have 
been the name of the ancient kingdom of Padang 
Lawas based on external sources. Fresh study of 
the dificult Porlak Dolok inscription, found in the 
extreme south of Padang Lawas, has moreover 
135 The principal exceptions are the two Tamil inscriptions 
of Sumatra of Lobu Tua (Barus) and Neusu (Aceh), 
included in Karashima & Subbarayalu 2009 (nos. 13 
and 16); on the former, see also Subbarayalu 1998.

--- [Page 36] ---
239Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
It has been a common assumption even in 
recent research that the Padang Lawas area was 
in some sense ‘Batak’ already in the period we 
are dealing with, and that the monuments are 
witness to a Batak past.137 It must be stated clearly 
that the epigraphical record gives virtually no 
support to such assumptions, at least not if Batak 
identity is deined on the basis of Batak language. 
This language is quite distinct from Malay in 
linguistic terms, and must have existed already 
by the time of the inscriptions under discussion 
here, yet Old Malay was the standard language 
of epigraphical expression in Padang Lawas. One 
must conclude either that the Padang Lawas area 
was not dominated by Batak speakers at the time, 
or else that the Batak language was not deemed 
it for epigraphical writing, for which the more 
cosmopolitan language Old Malay was preferred. 
That the second may have been the case can be 
inferred from the comparable phenomenon that 
we observe in the neighboring Minangkabau 
area, where the 14th century inscriptions issued 
under the rule of Ādityavarman, besides Sanskrit, 
also rely exclusively on a supralocal form of Old 
Malay, as does the Tanjung Tanah codex from 
Dharmasraya, whereas we may assume that the 
area of Western Sumatra already was inhabited 
by speakers of some dialectal form of Malay 
(a predecessor of Minangkabau) in this period. 
Indeed, the Si Topayan inscriptions of Padang 
Lawas do offer some signs of Batak presence in 
the form of a proper name which is still in use 
among Bataks today. Nevertheless, it may be 
good to maintain some prudence about the ethno-
linguistic composition of the ancient population 
of Padang Lawas.
The strong presence of Tamil has been inferred 
mainly on the basis of evidence external to Padang 
Lawas,138 and the Porlak Dolok inscription has 
not yet been given suficient attention in this 
regard. The fact that donation would be recorded 
is not clear. Depending on the interpretation of the 
passage in question, he may have been one of the 
princes ( rājaputra ). On the Balinese cases, see Goris 
1954/II: 306.
137 See e.g. Andaya 2002: 394 and 403.
138 See ibid.: 391.in a bilingual Old Malay-Tamil document indeed 
suggests the presence of a class of citizens literate 
in Tamil. Contrary to information provided by 
Perret et al. (2007: 55), who based themselves on 
an unreliable publication of one inscription, there 
is no trace of Javanese script nor of Javanese 
language in the inscriptions surveyed here, and 
so the epigraphical evidence is entirely silent 
about any connections — commercial, political, 
migratory, etc. — with Java that might have 
existed.
Religious history
The inscriptions allow us to gauge both the 
cosmopolitan networks in which Buddhists of 
ancient Sumatra participated, and the ways in 
which Buddhism was ‘localized’ in this part of 
Southeast Asia. Despite being right across the 
Bay of Bengal from Sri Lanka, not to mention 
the proximity of Burma and Thailand, there is 
not a single written trace of inluence of Pali 
Buddhism.139 On the contrary, we have evidence 
for the study and use of a variety of Sanskrit texts, 
both Mahāyānasūtras and Tantras. On the level of 
practices and institutions, we see participation 
in pan-Asian practices such as the donation of 
miniature stūpas for funerary purposes, possibly as 
a means to make merit for the donor. On the other 
hand, it seems we may interpret the use of the term 
kuṭi haji, i.e. ‘king’s kuṭi’, in the Paṇai inscription 
as evidence of some degree of commonality of 
traditions with Java, for in the very limited state 
of my present knowledge, the use of the word kuṭi 
in the sense of ‘monastery’ (or, more simply, as 
139 There are nevertheless material traces of contacts with 
Sri Lanka. One of them is the bronze image of a seated 
Buddha shown by Rumbi Mulia (1980: 10) as pl. 2 
(this volume, “The Sculpture...”, no. 146). Lunsingh 
Scheurleer & Klokke 1988: 58, consider this an import 
from Sri Lanka. I am aware that Pali Buddhism did not 
become predominant in Sri Lanka until after the 12th 
century, but since Buddhism thrived in Sumatra well 
into the 14th if not the 15th century, the absence of traces 
of Pali Buddhism seems signiicant. I use the term ‘Pali 
Buddhism’ (i.e. a Pali-using Buddhism, transmitting 
Pali texts, etc.) to avoid the term Theravāda, in the light 
of Peter Skilling’s arguments (2009).

--- [Page 37] ---
240Arlo Grifiths
an abbreviation of gandhakuṭī ) would seem to be 
a speciically Indonesian innovation. 
This question is related to the interpretation of 
the meaning and history of the word biara, which 
is used till today to denote the monuments in 
Padang Lawas and is found also in one of the two 
Si Topayan inscriptions. Rather than taking it in the 
narrow sense of a Buddhist monastery — i.e. the 
sense of the Sanskrit vihāra — previous scholars 
have assumed that it applies to all ruins of the pre-
Islamic past, irrespective of the original function 
of the monuments in question, none of which, 
they believed, could convincingly be supposed 
to have functioned as monastery.140 It is therefore 
not certain that the second Si Topayan inscription 
indeed records the foundation of a monastic 
institution. To my mind this is nevertheless likely, 
because this Si Topayan inscription associates 
the monument in question with the monarch, 
and we found a similar association in the Paṇai 
inscription.
It may not be too far aield to mention here 
one other Sumatran inscription where a vihāra 
igures. It is the Old Malay Hujung Langit 
inscrip tion, found at a site in the mountainous 
region of the northwest of Lampung province, far 
to the South of any of the other sites we have thus 
far been discussing. Only the dating formula of 
140 See Bosch 1930: 135.  Damais (1963: 541 n. 3): “Disons 
ici que les monuments qui subsistent sont tous appelés 
par les habitants biarå, qui vient directement du 
sanskrit wihāra. Comme ces monuments eux-mêmes 
ne peuvent avoir été des monastères, il est probable que 
les monastères qui étaient attachés à chacun d’eux et 
étaient construits en matériaux périssables, ont disparu. 
Le nom de biarå  qui devait désigner originairement tout 
le complexe, a ini par s’appliquer aux monuments en 
briques qui ont résisté au temps et qui semblent être en 
grande majorité des stupa”. But the possibility that we 
are still dealing with vihāras can, failing excavations, 
not be excluded, all the less so — Iain Sinclair points 
out to me — as we have to take into account that in 
a late Vajrayāna context, one may expect monasteries 
where entirely celibate monasticism was not the modus 
operandi. In other words, the problem with Damais’ 
statement is that he fails to make explicit what he 
understood to be the deining characteristics of a 
‘monastery’.the inscription (probably indicating a date in 997 
ce), and some very short other extracts, have thus 
far seen the light, in a study of L.-Ch. Damais 
(1962), which also dispelled the previously 
existing notion that the inscription would be in 
Old Javanese language. I visited the site of the 
inscription in August 2010, and prepared two 
estampages. These do not yet allow me to publish 
the entire text (for which it will be necessary to 
return to the site, and ideally to prepare a better 
estampage), but do allow me to state with some 
conidence that the inscription records a grant 
of the king or crown-prince called puṁku haji 
yovarājya śrī harideva  (l. 7), which seems to 
have involved staff members of a monastery 
called Nandavihāra (l. 10 and 13). It needs to be 
explored whether there is any possibility that this 
Nandavihāra might be identiied with the ruins of 
Candi Jepara close by on the slope of the crater-
lake Ranau, just across the border into South 
Sumatra province.141 In any case, it is remarkable 
that the Deśavarṇana  (80.2) inds occasion to 
make special mention of a Buddhist sanctuary 
named Tathāgatapura at Bukit Sulang Lemah (an 
unidentiied place) in Lampung, founded in 1338 
ce.142
Not a single publication on the ancient history 
of Padang Lawas leaves unmentioned the fact 
that Buddhism was predominantly of “Vajrayāna” 
afiliation, in other words that the Buddhism 
encountered here was Tantric, which was indeed 
the case. The notions of Tantric Buddhism that 
are transparent thus far  are however mostly rather 
stereotypical. The reader is presented a picture of 
“orgiastic” and bloody rites, involving demonic 
igures, dance, and magical syllables.143 If any 
particular form of Tantric Buddhism is mentioned, 
141 Nothing substantial has been published on these ruins. 
See Krom 1914: 127. There are unpublished reports 
by Machi Suhadi & Soeroso, Laporan penelitian 
arkeologi Klasik di situs Jepara, 20 mei –2 juni 1984  
(Jakarta: Puslit Arkenas) and Rr. Triwurjani et al., 
Survei Arkeologi di Situs Danau Ranau, Sumatra 
Selatan  (Jakarta: Bidang Arkeometri, Puslit Arkenas, 
1993).
142 See Poerbatjaraka 1918.
143 Cf. for instance Schnitger 1939: 94–97.

--- [Page 38] ---
241Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
then it is always the Kālacakra. This is probably 
an inheritance of information taken from early 20th 
century publications on Tantric Buddhism, which 
almost exclusively relied on sources from Tibet, 
where the Kālacakra has indeed played a formative 
role in Tibetan Buddhism as it is today. But to my 
knowledge there is absolutely no evidence for the 
reception of any part of the Kālacakra tradition in 
Padang Lawas, nor anywhere else in Sumatra.144 
We see — here as in other aspects of the treatment 
of the history of religion in Padang Lawas — a 
tendency for scholars to reproduce uncritically 
what previous scholars have written, combined 
with the tendency (noted by Perret et al . 2007: 
61) to make far-reaching generalizations on the 
basis of very thin evidence. 
Recent advances in the study of Tantric 
Buddhism have thus far never been cited,145 nor 
144 Contrast Kulke 2009: 233 (about West Sumatra): 
“Aditya  varman displayed himself by his inscription 
and his Bhairava statue as an enthusiastic devotee of 
the Kalachakra cult and its orgiastic Tantric rituals.” 
Writing about Padang Lawas, Andaya (2002: 392) 
did mention the same “famous fourteenth-century 
Adityavarman statue in the form of the god Bhairava, 
one of the important deities in Kalacakra or Left-
Handed Tantric Buddhism, found at Rambahan on 
the Batang Hari” (about which, see Claudine Bautze-
Picron’s contribution to this volume), but is on the 
whole much more careful than Kulke. To mention just 
one other recent example, Perret et al. (2007: 62) have 
fallen victim to old confusions when they say about the 
Heruka statue of Biaro Bahal II that this deity is “un 
des dieux les plus puissants du bouddhisme Vajrayāna 
et Kālacakra, maître de la secte tantrique des adorateurs 
de Bhairava réputés pour leurs rituels comportant des 
orgies et des sacriices humains avec consommation de 
sang”, referring back, in support of this statement, to 
Bosch 1930: 140–143.
145 For a down to earth general presentation of Mantranaya 
(“Vajrayāna”) Buddhism in India, see Davidson 2002, 
and for a study based on rich textual and epigraphic 
evidence Sanderson 2009, esp. 124–240 (“The deve-
lop   ment of tantric buddhism through the adoption and 
adaptation of Śaiva and Śākta Śaiva models”). Also 
much to be recommended are two papers by Harunaga 
Isaacson: the article of 2010 and the lecture “Tantric 
Buddhism In India (from c. A.D. 800 to c. A.D. 
1200)” available online at www.buddhismuskunde.
uni-hamburg.de/fileadmin/pdf/digitale_texte/Bd2-
K02Isaacson.pdf  [accessed 15 February 2013]. The text has any attempt been made to go beyond gene-
ral statements by linking the traces of tantric 
Buddhism to any of the rich variety of speciic 
textual traditions in which Tantric Buddhism 
was transmitted throughout South Asia and into 
East and Southeast Asia, and which must have 
penetrated Padang Lawas too. It is here that 
the epigraphical evidence has revealed itself 
to be particularly enlightening, for it provides 
an unmistakable instance of citation of the 
foundational text of the tantric cult focused on 
Hevajra, and hence conirms the evidence of 
sculptural art presented in Claudine Bautze-
Picron’s contribution to this volume.
It bears repeating, in conclusion, that whenever 
the religious afiliation of the inscriptions of 
Padang Lawas is determinable, it is explicitly 
Buddhist. This fact must be kept in mind in re-
evaluating the oft-repeated claims that some form 
of Hinduism was practiced in ancient Padang 
Lawas besides Buddhism.146 Such may well have 
been the case, but the most commonly adduced 
piece of evidence, namely the discovery of 
several images of the deity Gaṇeśa, does not have 
the weight that scholars have attributed it. For the 
deity Gaṇeśa — as well as his alter ego s Vināyaka, 
etc. — has entered the Buddhist pantheon both as 
a protective deity and as a demonic creature.147
of the lecture largely overlaps with the 2010 paper, but 
makes the important distinction (p. 4 and n. 8) between 
tantric Buddhism as a soteriology and the “many 
elements—such as the use of ‘magical formulas’—
that are commonly (and not incorrectly) associated 
with Vajrayāna Buddhism […] usually employed for 
a variety of this-worldly purposes rather than as a 
particularly effective means to enlightenment.” The 
epigraphical evidence presented above relates (at least 
in any direct way) only to the second aspect of the 
Mantranaya. See also Woodward 2004.
146 See Perret et al. 2007: 63–64 where all the evidence is 
assembled.
147 Cf. also de Mallmann 1976: 166–167, and the essays 
by R.L Brown, C. Wilkinson and L. Lancaster in 
Brown 1991. The paper by Wilkinson offers tantalizing 
evidence (pp. 236–239) for a possible connection 
between the cult of Gaṇeśa in Tibetan Buddhism, 
and the master Dharmakīrti who presumably 
resided in Sumatra. On this Dharmakīrti and the 
Sumatran connection of Tantric Buddhism in Tibet, 

--- [Page 39] ---
242Arlo Grifiths
Appendix: the words brahala, bharāla, 
bharāḍa, bhaṭāra
The occurrence of the word brahala in the 
second Si Topayan inscription above gives rise 
to the following excursus. As stated above, this 
word (corresponding to modern Malay berhala) 
must be related to the word bharāla which is 
attested several times in a number of inscriptions 
associated with the reign of Kr ̥tanagara in Java 
during part of the 13th century, both in Malay and 
Javanese contexts, and since these words also 
occur in feminine forms with ending - ī (or -i) there 
is likely to be some connection with Sanskrit.
Contrary to a rash claim for which I was 
myself responsible in Bautze-Picron & Grifiths 
(2010), the idea that the Indonesian languages are 
the lexical borrowers and an Indian language the 
donor of this word is not without complications. 
The same claim was made even more conidently 
by Lokesh Chandra (1982) in his notes on the 
Teeuw & Robson edition of the Old Javanese 
kakavin Kuñjarakarṇadharmakathana : 
Teeuw/Robson (1981:23) say: “There is, how-
ever, one further igure, a rather mysterious one, 
who turns up in this Canto: in 2.1 even a whole 
stanza is devoted to someone who is twice called 
bharāli (la and 2a) and who obviously in terms 
of protocol has precedence over all the other 
gods … The word bharāli has also been found in 
inscriptions on statues of gods (Brandes 1904:85, 
94). Brandes has given a lengthy survey of the 
Buddhist pantheon, especially the śaktis. He is 
rightly of the opinion that these variants (bharāla 
and bharāli) of bhaṭāra and bhaṭāri cannot 
be autochthonous in Java.” The editors rightly 
maintain that bharāli is bhaṭāri. They concur 
with Brandes in maintaining that the variant 
bharāli cannot be autochthonous in Java. Bharāli 
is a vajrayāna term which is of Indic origin. 
The form bharāli is actually found in Nepalese 
sketch-books of vajrayāna iconography which are 
being edited by the writer of this note.
see Schoterman 1986 and Skilling 1997. The latter 
author, ignoring Schoterman’s contribution, situates 
Dharmakīrti on the Malay peninsula.Any such occurrences in Nepalese sketch-
books are unknown to Gudrun Bühnemann, who 
spe cializes in their study and whom I have consul-
ted in this matter, but we will see below that there 
are indeed Nepalese data relevant to the issue.
The idea that bharāla is an Indic word was 
irst expressed by Kern (1920 [1917]: 316), who 
considered it to be a relatively recent Prakrit 
(Middle Indic) form developed from bhaṭāra 
(through bhaṭṭāra, which is attested as such, from 
an inlected form of bhartr ̥ ‘master’, such as acc. 
sg. bhartāram ), itself a Middle Indo-Aryan form 
accepted back into the Sanskrit (Old Indo-Aryan) 
lexicon. Whereas Kern admitted he knew no Indian 
source actually using bharāla , Gonda (1973: 
98) was less careful in this regard, and simply 
afirmed that the word is Prakrit. Subsequently, de 
Casparis (1997: 13) explained berhala as deriving 
from Sanskrit bhaṭṭāra  through Prakrit. However, 
due to some oversight, the word berhala is not 
included in Jones’s (2007) list of loanwoards in 
Malay. Despite the absence of an attested Indian 
ancestor, Old Malay brahala, modern berhala and 
related words in other languages of Indonesia must 
derive from bharāla, and the latter from bhaṭāra 
(note the occurrence of this word in the Gunung 
Tua inscription), with a single ṭ. It is revealing 
in this regard that there are Indonesian Buddhist 
texts where the words bharāla and bhaṭāra are 
used interchangeably: see e.g. the Kalpabuddha  
edited by Bosch (1961: 132–133).
An argument not yet invoked thus far, to my 
knowledge, in further support and explanation 
of this derivation, is provided by the name of the 
sage Bharāḍa in the famous 13th-century Joko 
Dolog inscription and later Javanese sources 
(cf. Hadi Sidomulyo 2009). This bharāḍa shows 
ḍ, representing a phonetically intermediate state 
between the original ṭ of bhaṭāra and the l of 
bharāla, after the occurrence of metathesis (* bha­
ḍāra ). The cost of postulating such metathesis 
saves us the expense of having to postulate two 
sound correspondences ( r<ṭ and l<r), and leaves 
us with the single series of correspondences l<ḍ<ṭ 
common (in intervocalic position) both within 
Indo-Aryan and between Indo-Aryan and Malay.

--- [Page 40] ---
243Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Returning now to the possibility, alluded to by 
Lokesh Chandra, that there might be Nepalese data 
throwing light on these issues, it is a remarkable 
fact that almost all of the aforementioned word-
forms are indeed attested in sources in Newari, 
the indigenous Tibeto-Burman language of the 
Kathmandu valley, that starts to be well attested 
from the 14th century onwards. Lienhard (1999: 
38) mentions i.a. the forms bahāla, bahāra and 
bharāḍa, all clearly related in meaning to the 
Indonesian words under discussion, and explains them all as derived from Sanskrit bhaṭṭāra(ka) . The 
confrontation of these Newari with the Indonesian 
lexical data gives rise to complicated questions 
as to the direction and vectors of borrowing, or 
to the possibility of independent occurrence of 
identical sound changes in two separate regions of 
Buddhist Asia linguistically non-Indo-Aryan but 
strongly inluenced by the Sanskrit tradition. Any 
attempt to answer such questions falls out of the 
scope of this Appendix.148
148 I gratefully acknowledge the signiicant suggestions 
and bibliographic references received from Iain 
Sinclair with regard to the Newari data.

--- [Page 41] ---
244Arlo Grifiths
1. Paṇai inscription. Photos Daniel Perret and EFEO estampage.a. b.
c.

--- [Page 42] ---
245Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
2. The Gunung Tua Lokanātha image with inscription. Photo Daniel Perret.
4. The stone inscription of Tandihat I; detail of ornament. Photos Daniel Perret; Arlo Grifiths.
a.
b.

--- [Page 43] ---
246Arlo Grifiths
3. The Porlak Dolok inscription. Photo of 
estampage (courtesy of Y. Subbarayalu) and 
photos Daniel Perret.a.
b.
c.

--- [Page 44] ---
247Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
5. Pedestal bearing inscription Si Topayan I. 
Photo OD-17041 and EFEO estampage.
b.a.
6. Pedestal bearing inscription Si Topayan II. 
Photo OD-17042 and EFEO estampage.a.
b.

--- [Page 45] ---
248Arlo Grifiths
7. Gold foil inscription of Aek Sangkilon. Photo Daniel Perret.
8. Gold foil inscription of Tandihat II. Photo Véronique Degroot.

--- [Page 46] ---
249Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
9. Gold foil inscription of Si Pamutung. Photo Museum Negeri Provinsi Sumatra Utara.
10. Inscribed lion igure from Tandihat II. Photo Arlo Grifiths and EFEO estampage.a.b.

--- [Page 47] ---
250Arlo Grifiths
11. Fragment of inscribed lion igure from Tandihat I, 
from photo collection Th. van Erp, UB Leiden, P-045435 (upside down). 
Courtesy of the Friends of the Kern Institute.
12. Inscribed miniature stūpa  of Sorik Merapi, MNI D. 53. 
Photo Emmanuel Francis, estampage at Leiden University library.
a. b.

--- [Page 48] ---
251Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
13. Inscribed miniature stūpa  of Sorik Merapi, MNI D. 65. 
Photo Arlo Grifiths, estampage at Leiden University library.
b.
a.
14. Inscribed miniature stūpa  of Sorik Merapi, MNI D. 84. 
Photo Arlo Grifiths, estampage at Leiden University library.a.
b.

--- [Page 49] ---
252Arlo Grifiths
16. Inscribed stone from Candi Bungsu at Muara Takus. 
Photo Rijksmuseum voor V olkenkunde, Leiden, inv. no. 1403-3712.
15. Inscribed miniature stūpa  of Sorik Merapi, MNI D. 85. 
Photo Arlo Grifiths, estampage at Leiden University library.
b.a.

--- [Page 50] ---
253Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
17. Inscribed stone from Muara Takus. Photo Daniel Perret.
18. Inscribed stone from Muara Takus. Photo Daniel Perret.

--- [Page 51] ---
BEFEO  Bulletin de l’École française d’Ex­
trême­Orient
BKI Bijdragen tot de Taal­, Land­ en V ol­
kenkunde (van Nederlandsch­Indië)
JBG Jaarboek van het Koninklijk 
Bataviaasch Genootschap voor 
Kunsten en Wetenschappen
MNI Museum Nasional, Jakarta, Indo­
nesia
NBG  Notulen van het (Koninklijk) Bata­
viaasch Genootschap voor Kunsten 
en WetenschappenABBReVIAtIons
OV Oudheidkundig Verslag
PPS­SBU  Bambang Budi Utomo 2007, Pra-
sasti-Prasasti Sumatra , Sumatra 
Bagian Utara.
VG H. Kern, Verspreide Geschriften , 
’s­Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff, 
Deel 1–15, 1913–1928; Register 
en Bibliograie, 1929; Supplement, 
1936.
BIBLIoGRAPHY
Acri, Andrea & Arlo Grifiths
2014 “The Romanisation of Indic Script Used 
in Ancient Indonesia”, BKI 170.2–3, 
365–78.
Adelaar, K. Alexander
2004 “À la recherche d’afixes perdus 
en malais”, Faits de langues  23–24 
[= E. Zeitoun (ed.), Les languages 
austronésiennes ], 165–79.
Aichele, W.
1987 “Kabayan”, BKI 143, 201–07.
Andaya, Leonard
2002 “The Trans­Sumatra Trade and the 
Ethnicization of the ‘Batak’”, BKI 158, 
367–409.
Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala 
Yogya karta
2007 Pusaka Aksara Yogyakarta. Alih Aksara 
dan Alih Bahasa Prasasti Koleksi Balai 
Pelestarian Peninggalan Yogyakarta . 
Bogem, Kalasan, Yogyakarta: BPPP 
Yogyakarta.Bambang Budi Utomo
2007 Prasasti-Prasasti Sumatra.  Jakarta: 
Pusat Penelitian dan Pengembangan 
Arkeologi Nasional.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine & Arlo Grifiths
2010 review of Reichle 2007, BKI 166, 359–
61.
Bhattachary(y)a, Benoytosh
1958 The Indian Buddhist Iconography . 
Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay.
1968 Sādhanamālā . 2 vols. Baroda: Oriental 
Institute. [Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, 
nos. 26 & 41.]
Boechari
1985–86 Prasasti Koleksi Museum Nasional , 
jilid 1. Jakarta: Museum Nasional.
Bosch, F.D.K.
1930 “Verslag van een reis door Sumatra”, 
OV 1930 (Bijlage C), 133–57.
1961 Selected Studies in Indonesian Archaeo-
logy. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Brandes, J.L.A.
1904 Archaeologisch Onderzoek op Java en 

--- [Page 52] ---
Arlo Grifiths
Madura. I. Beschrijving van de ruïne 
bij de desa Toempang genaamd Tjandi 
Djago, in de residentie Pasoeroean . 
’s­Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, Batavia: 
Albrecht & Co.
1913 Oud-Javaansche Oorkonden . Nagela­
ten transscripties van wijlen Dr. J.L.A. 
Brandes. Uitgegeven door Dr. N.J. 
Krom. Batavia, Albrecht & Co. / 
’s­Hage, M. Nijhoff. [Verhandelingen 
van het Bataviaasch Genootschap, LX.]
1920 Pararaton (Ken Arok) of het boek der 
koningen van Tumapĕl en van Maja­
pahit . Tweede druk bewerkt door Dr. 
N.J. Krom met medewerking van †Prof. 
Mr. Dr J.C.G. Jonker, K. Kraemer 
en R.Ng. Poerbatjaraka. ’s­Hage, M. 
Nijhoff / Batavia, Albrecht & Co. 
[Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch 
Genootschap, LXII.]
Brown, Robert L. (ed.)
1991 Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God . 
Albany: State University of New York 
Press.
de Casparis, J.G.
1956 Selected Inscriptions from the 7th to the 
9th Century AD . [Prasasti Indonesia II.] 
Bandung: Masa Baru.
1958 Short Inscriptions from Tjaṇḍi Plaosan­
Lor. Djakarta. Berita Dinas Purbakala / 
Bulletin of the Archaeological Service  
of the Republic of Indonesia, No. 4. 
[Reprinted in Capita Selecta Bulletin 
of the National Research Centre of 
Archaeology of Indonesia , Jakarta: 
Pusat Penelitian dan Pengembangan 
Arkeologi Nasional, 2008, 229–67.]
1967 “The Date of the Grahi Buddha”, 
Journal of the Siam Society  55.1, 31–
40.
1980 “Ahmat Majanu’s Tombstone at Pengka­
lan Kempas and its Kawi Inscription”, Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society  53, 1–22.
1997 Sanskrit Loan-words in Indonesian. 
An annotated check-list of words from 
Sanskrit in Indonesian and Traditional 
Malay . Jakarta: Badan Penyelenggara 
Seri NUSA , Universitas Katolik 
Indonesia Atma Jaya [ NUSA , vol. 41].
1997 “Dīpaṅkara in Sumatra (?)”, in: Natasha 
Eilenberg, M.C. Subhadradis Diskul 
& Robert L. Brown (eds.), Living a 
Life in Accord with Dhamma: Papers 
in Honor of Professor Jean Boisselier 
on His Eighteenth Birthday , Bangkok: 
Silpakorn University, 127–30.
Cœdès, George
1908 “La stèle de Tép Praṇaṃ (Cambodge)”, 
Journal asiatique  série 10, tome 11, 
203–25.
1918 “Le royaume de Çrīvijaya”,  BEFEO  18, 
1–36.
1930 “Les inscriptions malaises de Çrīvijaya”, 
BEFEO  30, 29–80.
Conze, Edward
1973 The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight 
Thousand Lines & Its Verse Summary . 
Bolinas: Four Seasons Foundation.
Creese, Helen
2001 “Old Javanese Studies. A review of the 
ield”, BKI 157, 3–33.
Cruijsen, T., A. Grifiths & M.J. Klokke
2012  “The Cult of the Buddhist Dhāraṇī 
Deity Mahāpratisarā along the Mari-
time Silk Route: New Epigraphic 
and Iconographic Evidence from the 
Indonesian Archipelago”, Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist 
Studies , 35.1–2, 71–157.
Crucq, K.C.
1929 “Epigraische aanteekeningen”, OV 
1929, 258–83.

--- [Page 53] ---
Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Damais, Louis­Charles
1951 “Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne. 
I: Méthode de reduction des dates 
javanaises en dates européennes,” 
BEFEO  45.1, 1–41.
1952 “Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne. III: 
Liste des principales inscriptions datées 
de l’Indonésie,” BEFEO  46.1, 1–105.
1955 “Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne. IV: 
Discussion de la date des inscriptions,” 
BEFEO  47.1, 7–290.
1962 “Études soumatranaises I. La date 
de l’inscription de Hujung Langit 
(« Bawang »)”, BEFEO  50, 275–88.
1963 “Bibliographie indonésienne. V . 
Publications du Service archéologique 
de l’Indonésie,” BEFEO  51.2, 535–82.
1970 Répertoire onomastique de l’épigraphie 
javanaise (jusqu’à pu Siṇḍok Śrī Īśā na­
wi krama Dharmottuṅgadewa) . Paris: 
École française d’Extrême­Orient.
Davidson, Ronald M. 
2002 Indian Esoteric Buddhism . A Social 
History of the Tantric Movement. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Edi Sedyawati
1994a Pengarcaan Gaṇeśa masa Keḍiri dan 
Siŋhasāri. Sebuah Tinjauan Sejarah 
Kesenian . Jakarta: LIPI/RUL/EFEO.
1994b Gaṇeśa Statuary of the Kaḍiri and 
Siŋhasāri Periods. A Study of Art 
History . Leiden: KITLV .
van Erp, Theodoor
1941 “Archaeological inds in Padang Lawas 
(Tapanuli residentship) Sumatra”, 
Annual Bibliography of Indian 
Archaeology  14 (for the year 1939), 
13–20.
Gallop, Annabel with Ben Arps
1991 Golden Letters: Writing Traditions of 
Indonesia / Surat Emas: Budaya Tulis di 
Indonesia . London: the British Library 
& Jakarta: Yayasan Lontar.Gonda, Jan
1973 Sanskrit in Indonesia . Second Edition. 
Reprint 1998, New Delhi: International 
Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya 
Prakashan.
Goris, Roelof
1954 Inscripties voor Anak Wungçu . [Prasasti 
Bali, I–II.] Diterbitkan oleh Lembaga 
Bahasa dan Budaja Fakultet Sastra 
dan Filsafat Universitet Indonesia. 
Bandung: Masa Baru.
Grifiths, Arlo
2011 “Inscriptions of Sumatra: further data 
on the epigraphy of the Musi and Batang 
Hari river basins”, Archipel 81, 139–75.
2012  “Inscriptions of Sumatra II. Short Epi­
graphs in Old Javanese,” Wacana  14 
(2), 197–214.
2014a “Written Traces of the Buddhist Past: 
mantra s and dhāraṇī s in Indonesian 
inscriptions”, Bulletin of the School of 
Oriental and African Studies  77.1, 137–
94.
2014b “The ‘Greatly Ferocious’ Spell ( Mahā­
ra udra­Nāma­Hr ̥daya ): A dhāra ṇī  In s­
cribed on a Lead­Bronze Foil Unearthed 
near Borobudur”, in: Kurt Tropper (ed.), 
Epigraphic Evi dence in the Pre-Modern 
Buddhist World: Proceedings of the 
Epo nymous Con ference Held in Vienna, 
14-15 Oct. 2011 , Vienna: Arbeitskreis 
für Tibetische und Buddhistische Stu­
dien, Universität Wien, 1–36.
Grifiths, Arlo, Nicolas Revire & Rajat Sanyal
 2013 “An Inscribed Bronze Sculpture of 
a Buddha in bhadrāsana at Museum 
Rang ga warsita in Semarang (Central 
Ja va, Indonesia)”, Arts Asiatiques  68, 
3–26.
Groeneveldt, W.P.
1887 Catalogus der Archaeologische Verza-
me     ling van het Bataviaasch Genoot-

--- [Page 54] ---
Arlo Grifiths
schap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 
[…] met aanteekeningen omtrent de 
op ver schil lende voorwerpen voorko -
mende in  scripties en een voorlopig in -
ventaris der beschreven steenen . Bata ­
via: Albrecht & Co.
Hadi Sidomulyo
2009 “Kṛtanagara and the resurrection of 
Mpu Bharāda”, Indonesia and the Ma-
lay World  39, 123–42.
Hasan Djafar
2011 “Prasasti Batutulis Bogor”, Amerta  
29.1, 1–13.
Hasanuddin, Sekula Perangin­Angin, Humala 
Pardede, Suruben Purba & Partogi Sirait
1994/95 Buku Katalog Koleksi Arkeologi Muse-
um Negeri Propinsi Sumatera Utara. 
The Catalogue Book of Archaeology 
Collection of the North Sumatra Gov-
ern ment Museum . Medan: Depar te men 
Pendidikan dan Kebudaya an, Direktorat 
Jenderal Kebudayaan, Mu seum Negeri 
Propinsi Sumatera Utara.
von Hinüber, Oskar
2009 “Verwischte Spuren. Der Gebrauch 
buddhistischer Texte nach dem Zeugnis 
von Literatur, Inschriften und Dokumen­
ten”, in: W. Reinhard (ed.), Sakrale 
Texte. Hermeneutik und Lebenspraxis 
in den Schriftkulturen (München 2009), 
153–73 (notes 325–34).
Isaacson, Harunaga
2002a “Ratnākaraśānti’s Hevajrasahajasad-
yo ga   (Studies in Ratnākaraśānti’s tan-
tric works I)”, in: Ra ﬀaele Torella (ed.), 
Le Parole e i Marmi: studi in onore di 
Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70° compleanno  
(Rome 2001 [appeared 2002]), 457–87.2002b “Ratnākaraśānti’s Bhramaharanāma He  -
va   jra  sā dhana : Critical Edition (Studies 
in Rat nā karaśānti’s tantric works III)”, 
in: Journal of the Inter national Col -
lege for Advanced Buddhist Studies  5 
(2002), 151(80)–176(55).
2009 “A collection of Hevajrasādhanas and 
related Works in Sanskrit”, in: Ernst 
Stein kellner, Duan Qing & Helmut 
Krasser (eds.), Sanskrit manuscripts 
in China. Proceedings of a panel at 
the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan 
Studies  (Beijing 2009), 89–136.
2010 “Observations on the Development of 
the Ritual of Initiation ( abhiṣeka ) in 
the Higher Buddhist Tantric Systems 
Hindu and Buddhist Initiations in India 
and Nepal”, in: A. Zotter & C. Zotter, 
Hindu and Buddhist Initiations in India 
and Nepal , Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 
261–79.
Jacq­Hergoualc’h, Michel
2002 The Malay Peninsula. Crossroads of 
the Maritime Silk Road (100 BC - 1300 
AD). Leiden: Brill.
Jones, Russell
2007 Loan-words in Indonesian and Malay . 
Leiden: KITLV .
Karashima, Noboru
2002 “Tamil Inscriptions in Southeast Asia 
and China”, in: idem  (ed)., Ancient and 
Medieval Commercial Activities in the 
Indian Ocean: Testimony of Inscriptions 
and Ceramic-sherds. Report of the 
Taisho University Research Project 
1997-2000 . Tokyo: Taisho University.
Karashima, Noboru & Y . Subbarayalu
2009 “Ancient and Medieval Tamil and 
Sans krit Inscriptions Relating to South­
east Asia and China”, Appendix I in: 
H. Kulke, K. Kesavapany & V . Sakhuja 
(eds.), Nagapattinam to Suvar na  dwipa. 
Relections on the Chola Naval Expe -

--- [Page 55] ---
Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
ditions to Southeast Asia , Singapore: 
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 
271–91.
Kern, H. 
1917 “Surūpa, Kalana, Barhala”, BKI 73, 
495–96; reprinted in: VG 9 (1920), 
313–16.
Kielhorn, F.
1902–03 “A List of Inscriptions of Southern India 
from about 500 A.D.”, Epigraphia 
Indica  7, Appendix.
Kimura, Takayasu (ed.)
1986 Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñā pāra mi­
tā, vol. II–III. Tokyo: Sankibo Bussho­
rin 1986.
Krom, N.J.
1911 “Gedateerde Inscripties van Java”, TBG  
53, 229–268.
1912 “Inventaris der Oudheden in de Pa dang­
sche Bovenlanden”, OV (Bijlage G), 
33–52.
1914 “V oorloopige Lijst van oudheden in 
de buitenbezittingen”, OV 1914 (Bij­
lage T), 101–86.
1916 “Een Sumatraansche inscriptie van 
koning Kṛtanagara”, Verslagen en Me-
de  deelingen der Koninklijke Aka de mie 
van Wetenschappen , afd. Letter kunde, 
5e reeks, deel II (1917), 306–39.
Kulke, Hermann
2009 “Adityawarman’s Highland Kingdom”, 
in: D. Bonatz et al. (eds.), From Distant 
Tales: Archaeology and Ethnohistory in 
the Highlands of Sumatra , Newcastle 
upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing, 229–52.
Lienhard, Siegfried
1999 Diamantmeister und Hausväter: bud-
dhis  tisches Gemeindeleben in Nepal . 
Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Aka­
demie der Wissenschaften.van Lohuizen­de Leeuw, Johanna Engelberta
1980 “The stūpa in Indonesia”, in: Anna 
Libera Dallapiccola & Stephanie 
Zingel­Avé Lallemant (eds.), The 
Stūpa, its Religious, Historical and 
Architectural Signiicance , Wiesbaden: 
Franz Steiner Verlag (Beiträge zur 
Südasien­Forschung, Südasien­Institut, 
Universität Heidelberg), 277–300.
Lokesh Chandra
1983 “Remarks on Kuñjarakarṇa”, BKI 139, 
363–65.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, P. & M.J. Klokke
1988 Divine Bronze. Ancient Indonesian 
Bronzes from A.D. 600 to 1600 . Leiden: 
E.J. Brill.
Machi Suhadi
1988 “Agama Budha Mahayana melatar­
belakangi bangunan Candi di Muara 
Jambi”, in: Rapat Evaluasi Hasil 
Penelitian III , Pandeglang, 5–9 
Desember 1986, Jakarta: Departemen 
Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, 172–81.
1989 “Mantra Buddha dari Negara ASEAN”, 
in: Proceedings Pertemuan Ilmiah 
Arkeologi V  (Yogyakarta, 4–7 Juli 
1989), part I: Studi Regional/Regional 
Studies, Ikatan Ahli Arkeologi Indo­
nesia, 103–32.
de Mallmann, Marie­Thérèse
1975 Introduction à l’iconographie du 
tântrisme bouddhique . Paris: Librairie 
Adrien­Maisonneuve [Bibliothèque 
du Centre de Recherches sur l’Asie 
Centrale et la Haute Asie I]. Reprint 
1986.
Miksic, John
2004 “The classical cultures of Indonesia”, 
in: Ian Glover & Peter Bellwood (eds.), 
Southeast Asia: From prehistory to 
history , London/New York: Routlegde­
Curzon, 234–56.

--- [Page 56] ---
Arlo Grifiths
van der Molen, Willem
2007 “The Syair of Minye Tujuh”, BKI 
163, 356–75. [Indonesian translation 
included in C. Guillot & L. Kalus, 
Inskripsi Islam Tertua di Indonesia , 
Jakarta: KPG, EFEO, Forum Jakarta­
Paris, 2008, repr. 2011.]
Mori, Masahide (ed.)
2009 Vajrāvalī of Abhayākaragupta. Edition 
of Sanskrit and Tibetan Versions . 2 
vols. Tring, UK: Institute of Buddhist 
Studies. [ Buddhica Brittanica , Series 
Continua, 11.]
van Naerssen, F.H.
1937 “Twee koperen oorkonden van Bali tung 
in het Koloniaal Instituut te Amster­
dam”, BKI 95, 441–61.
1938 “Inscripties van het Rijksmusem voor 
V olkenkunde te Leiden”, BKI 97, 501–
13.
Nik Hassan Shuhami Nik Abd. Rahman
1992 Arkeologi, Seni dan Kerajaan Kuno 
Sumatera Sebelum Abad ke-14 . Bangi: 
Ikatan Ahli Arkeologi Malaysia.
Nilakanta Sastri, K.A.
1955 The Cōḷas . 2nd revised edition. Madras: 
University of Madras.
Perret, Daniel
1995 La formation d’un paysage ethnique: 
Batak et Malais de Sumatra Nord-Est . 
Paris: EFEO.
2010 Kolonialisme dan Etnisitas. Batak dan 
Melayu di Sumatra Timur Laut . Jakarta: 
KPG, EFEO, Forum Jakarta­Paris, 
Pusat Penelitian dan Pengembangan 
Arkeologi Nasional.
Perret, Daniel, Heddy Surachman, Lucas P. 
Koestoro & Sukawati Susetyo
2007 “Le programme archéologique franco­indonésien sur Padang Lawas (Sumatra 
Nord). Rélexions préliminaires”, 
Archipel  74, 45–82.
Pigeaud, Theodore G. Th.
1960 Java in the 14th Century. A Study 
in Cultural History. The Nāgara­
Kĕrtāgama by Rakawi Prapañca of 
Majapahit, 1365 a.d. Third edition, 
revised and enlarged by some 
contemporaneous texts, with notes, 
translations, commentaries and a 
glossary. V ol. I: Javanese Texts in 
Transcription. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff.
Poerbatjaraka, R. Ng. (Lesya)
1918 “Majapahitsche heiligdommen in de 
Lampoeng”, OV 1918, 164–68.
Postma, Antoon
1992  “The Laguna Copper­Plate Inscription: 
Text and Commentary”, Philippine 
Studies  40, 183–203.
Reichle, Natasha
2007 Violence and Serenity. Late Buddhist 
Sculpture from Indonesia . Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press.
Renou, Louis & Jean Filliozat
1953 L’Inde classique. Manuel des études 
indiennes . Tome II. Paris: École 
française d’Extrême­Orient, 2001. Ré­
impression de l’édition de 1953.
Rita Margareta Setianingsih 
2001 “Vairocana dan Amitabha. Emanasi 
Buddha di Padang Lawas”, Berita 
Arkeo logi “Sangkhakala”  (Medan) 9, 
91–100.
Rita Margareta Setianingsih & Sri Hartini
2002 Prasasti Koleksi Museum Negeri Pro-
pin si Sumatera Utara . Medan: Dinas 
Kebudayaan dan Pariwisata Propinsi 
Sumatera Utara, Museum Negeri.

--- [Page 57] ---
Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Rita Margareta Setianingsih, Ery Soedewo, Deni 
Sutrisna & Suruhen Purba
2003 Prasasti dan bentuk pertulisan lain di 
wila yah kerja Balai Arkeologi Medan . 
Berita Penelitian Arkeologi, No. 10. 
Medan: Balai Arkeologi Medan, 
Kementerian Kebudayaan dan Pari­
wisata.
Rumbi Mulia
1980 The Ancient Kingdom of Panai and the 
Ruins of Padang Lawas (North Suma -
tra). Jakarta: Proyek Pengem bang an 
Media Kebudayaan, Depar temen P & 
K. [Reprinted in Capita Selecta Bulletin 
of the National Research Centre of Ar -
chaeology of Indonesia , Jakarta: Pusat 
Penelitian dan Pengem bangan Arkeo ­
logi Nasional, 2008, 101–33.]
Robson, Stuart
1995 Deśawarṇana (Nāgarakṛtāgama) by 
Mpu Prapañca . Leiden: KITLV Press.
Salomon, Richard
2003 “Writing Systems of the Indo­Aryan 
Scripts”, in: G. Cardona & D. Jain 
(eds.), The Indo-Aryan Languages , 
Lon don and New York: Routledge, 67–
103.
Sander, Lore 
2007  “Confusion of Terms and Terms of 
Confusion in Indian Palaeography,” in 
Karin Preisendanz (ed.), Expanding and 
Merging Horizons: Contributions to 
South Asian and Cross-Cultural Studies 
in Commemoration of Wilhelm Halbfass . 
Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 121–39.
Sanderson, Alexis
2009 “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Domi-
nance of Śaivism During the Early 
Medieval Period”, in S. Einoo (ed.), 
Genesis and Development of Tantrism , Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
41–349.
Satyawati Suleiman
1954 “Peninggalan­peninggalan Purbakala di 
Padang Lawas”, Amerta  2 [republished 
in 1985 in new orthography and with 
new pagination, which is followed 
here], 23–37.
1977 The Archaeology and History of West 
Sumatra . Bulletin of the Research 
Centre of Archaeology of Indonesia, 
No. 12. [Reprinted in Capita Selecta 
Bulletin of the National Research Centre 
of Archaeology of Indonesia , Jakarta: 
Pusat Penelitian dan Pengembangan 
Arkeologi Nasional, 2008, 56–82. I cite 
the pagination of this reprint.]
Schnitger, F.M.
1936 Oudheidkundige vondsten in Padang 
Lawas . Leiden: E.J. Brill.
1937 The archæology of Hindoo Sumatra . 
Leiden: E.J. Brill. [Internationales 
Archiv für Ethnographie, Supplement 
zu Band XXXV .]
1939 Forgotten Kingdoms in Sumatra . 
Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Schopen, Gregory
1987 “Burial Ad Sanctos  and the Physical 
Presence of the Buddha in Early Indian 
Buddhism: A Study in the Archaeology 
of Religions”, Religion  17, 193–225 
[reprinted in Schopen 1997: 114–47].
1989 “The stūpa cult and the extant Pāli 
vinaya”, Journal of the Pāli Text Society  
13, 83–100 [reprinted in Schopen 1997: 
86–98].
1990 “The Buddha as an Owner of Property 
and Permanent Resident in Medieval 
Indian Monasteries”, Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 18, 181–217 [reprinted in 
Schopen 1997: 258–89].
1997 Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks. 
Collected Papers on the Archaeology, 
Epi graphy, and Texts of Monastic 

--- [Page 58] ---
Arlo Grifiths
Buddhism in India . Honolulu: Univer­
sity of Hawai’i Press.
Schoterman, Jan
1986 Indonesische Sporen in Tibet. Lezing 
gehouden voor het Oosters Genootschap 
in Nederland te Leiden op 18 Maart 
1985 . Leiden: Brill.
Skilling, Peter
1997 “Dharmakīrti’s Durbodhāvaloka and 
the Literature of Śrīvijaya”, Journal of 
the Siam Society  85, 187–94.
2009  “Theravāda in History”, Paciic World 
(Journal of the Institute of Buddhist 
Studies) , third series, 11, 61–93.
Skorupski, Tadeusz (ed.)
1983 The Sarvadurgatipariśodhana Tantra. 
Eli mination of All Evil Destinies. 
Sanskrit and Tibetan texts with intro-
duction, translation and notes . Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Snellgrove, David L. (ed.)
1959 The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study . 
London: Oxford University Press. [Re­
printed Bangkok: Orchid Press, 2010.]
Subrahmaniam, T.N. (ed.)
1957 South Indian Temple Inscriptions . 
V olume III. Part II. Critically edited 
with Introduction and Notes. Madras: 
Government Oriental Manuscripts 
Library [Madras Government Oriental 
Series, 147].
Soutif, Dominique
2008 “Dénombrer les biens du dieu: Étude de 
la numération du vieux khmer ( vie­xiie 
siècles śaka)”, Siksācakr  10, 51–80.
Speyer, J.S.
1904 “Eene buddhistische inscriptie afkom ­
stig van Java”. Verslagen en Mede-
deelingen der Koninklijke Akademie 
van Wetenschappen , Afd. Letterkunde, 
4e reeks, deel VI (1904), 138–44 [irst 
part], 253–62 [“Tweede artikel”].van Stein Callenfels, P.V .
1920 “Rapport over een dienstreis door een 
deel van Sumatra”, OV 1920, 62–75.
Stutterheim, W.F.
1937 “De Archaeologische Verzameling”, 
JBG 4, 146–56.
Subbarayalu, Y . [= E. Cupparāyalū]
1994 “Cumatrāvil tamiḻk kalveṭṭukkaḷ” 
[Tamil inscriptions in Sumatra], in: 
Āvaṇam, Journal of the Tamil Nadu 
Archaeological Society , 4, 118–24.
1998 “The Tamil Merchant­Guild Inscription 
at Barus: A Rediscovery”, in: Claude 
Guillot (ed.), Histoire de Barus, 
Sumatra. Le site de Lobu Tua , volume I: 
Études et documents , Paris, Association 
Archipel, 25–33.
Tadmor, Uri
2000 “Rekonstruksi aksen kata bahasa 
Melayu”, in: Bambang Kaswanti Purwo 
& Yassir Nasanius (eds.), Pertemuan 
Linguistik (Pusat Kajian) Bahasa 
dan Budaya Atma Jaya Ketiga Belas , 
Jakarta: Pusat Kajian Bahasa dan 
Budaya, Unika Atma Jaya, 153–71.
Teeuw, A. & S.O. Robson
1981 Kuñjarakarṇa Dharmakathana. Libe­
ration Through the Law of the Buddha. 
An Old Javanese Poem by Mpu Ḍusun . 
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Vaidya, P.L. (ed.)
1960 Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā with 
Ha  ri   bhadra’ s Commentary Called Ālo­
ka. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute of 
Post­Graduate Studies and Research in 
Sanskrit Learning. [Buddhist Sanskrit 
Texts, no. 4.]
de la Vallée Poussin, Louis (ed.)
1896  Études et textes tantriques. Pañcakrama . 
Gand/Louvain.

--- [Page 59] ---
Inscriptions of Padang Lawas, Sorik Merapi and Muara Takus
Vergati, Anne
1982 “Le culte et l’iconographie du Buddha 
Dîpankara dans la vallée de Kathman­
dou”, Arts Asiatiques  37, 22–7.
Wilken, G.A.
1888 “De verbreiding van het matriarchaat 
op Sumatra”, BKI 37, 163–215.
Wisseman Christie, Jan
1998 “The Medieval Tamil­Language In­
scrip tions in Southeast Asia and China”, 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies  29.2, 
239–68.Woodward, Hiram
2004 “Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia 
in the Light of Recent Scholarship”, 
Journal of  Southeast Asian Studies  
35.2, 329–54.
Zhongxin Jiang & Toru Tomabecchi (eds.)
1995 The Pañcakramaṭippanī of Muniśrī­
bhadra. Introduction and Romanized 
Sanskrit Text . Bern etc.: Peter Lang.