--- [Page 1] ---
119The InscrIpTIon on an embossed Image of ŚIv a In gold leaf fro m cenTral Ja v a, IndonesIa
Chapter 8
The Inscription on an Embossed Image of Śiva in 
Gold Leaf from Central Java, Indonesia
Arlo Griffiths
The contribution of pauline lunsingh scheurleer dis cusses, among other works of art, an embossed gold 
leaf showing an image of Śiva engraved with one line of text on the right hand side  of the deity (fig. 
8.1). When this splendid artefact first became known to scholars, it was in the  hands of a collector in 
the town bukateja in kabupaten  purbalingga, 
province central Java. Its original findspot is 
unknown, but almost certainly lay somewhere 
in that province.
The inscription, generally considered to 
have been composed in old malay, was first 
published by J.g. de casparis (1956: 207‒11), 
who read as follows (see fig. 8.2):
// ini paḍehānda hawang payangṅān //
according to de casparis, “the only 
akṣara  which might not be beyond doubt 
is the ha in the second word”. he dates the 
inscription on palaeographic grounds to before 
840 ce, and translates: “These (presumably the 
deposit of bhasma ) are the corporeal remains 
of hawang (title) payangṅān (name).” The 
crucial element here is paḍehānda , of which 
it is admitted that one akṣara  is not beyond 
doubt, and which is assumed to be derived from 
the base deha , a loanword from sanskrit in 
which language it means “body”. his choice of 
reading leads de casparis to propose “corporeal 
remains” as translation for this form. 
de casparis’ interpretations were sub-
mitted to detailed scrutiny by l.-ch. damais 
(1968: 438ff). The most relevant elements of 
119
Figure 8.1 : embossed image of Śiva in gold leaf, central Java , 
private collection (photograph: arlo griffiths).
Figure 8.2 : Inscription on an embossed image of Śiva in gold leaf, central Java, from od 14323 (collection of ph otographs 
of the oudheidkundige dienst in nederlandsch-Indië, courtesy leiden University library).
Materializing SEA8_Griffiths.ind119   119 4/3/2013   11:58:23 PM

--- [Page 2] ---
120arlo grIffIThs
damais’ observations, in the present context, concern the date, which damais  feels must be earlier (c. 
775‒800 ce), and the reading of the sequence paḍehānda . damais suggests that one would have to read 
padechānda , realizing that this is not a word susceptible to interpretation, but proposing no solution. 
my solution to the problem of reading starts from t he observation that the akṣara ch  is so rare as to 
make its occurrence highly unlikely whether intenti onally or by mistake. I also draw attention to the fact 
that the akṣara de  does not show precisely its usual form. I would pr opose to read the problematic akṣara  
as a yā, written, like the de, with a superfluous stroke that makes it hard to recognize at first sight, and 
can point in support of this new reading to another  oddly written yā, on an inscription that was recovered 
not long ago in palembang (griffiths 2011: 151‒6). With adaptation to my system of transliteration, an d 
one slight change in the separation of words, the reading thus becomes:
// °ini padeyān da havaṃ payaṃṅān∙ //
The word pa-deya-an  is derived from deya, a loanword from sanskrit, where it means “to be g iven” 
or “gift”. In my opinion, we have to forget about any connection with deha , and hence with corporeal 
remains. The meaning is clearly: “This (referring t o the embossed plaque) is the donation of da hawang 
payangan.” The idea that we have here the record of  a donation raises a question about the function of  the 
circumfix pa…an , which a priori  rather indicates the place or object of an action rather than the action 
itself, but it finds significant support in a very similar gold plaque which bears  — in precisely the same 
position! — an inscription about which some confusion has been created by a wrong reading cited in 
published catalogues.1 The correct reading is si mpu gaurī  (damais 1970: 43n9), and this must be a record 
of the donor. The image is clearly a male, while ga urī is a woman’s name, and comparison with the only 
other known case of names prefixed with si mpu , two names inscribed on a silver parasol,2 reveals that 
the persons in questions are also the donors of the  inscribed object in question. I quote here its beg inning: 
dāna si mpu jāyā lāvan sī mpu lakṣana riṅ sīma  “donation of si mpu Jāyā with si mpu lakṣaṇa to the 
freehold.” It is surely no coincidence that dāna , the word for donation used here, is cognate with deya  
(both being derived from the sanskrit root dā). 
elsewhere in the same volume that contained his edi tion of the inscription that concerns us here, de 
casparis observed that “Indian inscriptions often show the well-known formula deyadharmo ’yaṃ  etc., 
which has not yet been met with in any buddhist inscription from Indonesia” (1956: 184n38). I be lieve 
that we now have an old malay variant of precisely this formula: ini padeyān  is to all appearances a 
calque on deyadharmo ’yam .3 The latter formula is, by the way, not limited to buddhist contexts in India,4 
so there is nothing surprising about its occurrence in a Śaiva context here.
This donation inscription consists of five words, t he last two of which belong to the domain of 
names and titles and could occur as such both in ol d malay and in old Javanese. The first word is the 
demonstrative pronoun ini, which means “this”, and can only be old malay, fo r old Javanese has other 
demonstrative pronouns. The second word, as I have noted, contains the circumfix pa…an , which is 
only productive in Javanese, and normally forms nouns of place.5 from this I separate as third word da, 
a status-marking personal article. The theoreticall y possible alternative interpretation as suffix -(n)da/-
(ṇ)ḍa  must be rejected, since this suffix does not exist  in Javanese and its (non-possessive) use on nouns 
that do not denote humans would be unprecedented in  malay.6 There is evidence to support the existence 
of the word da in both languages, but it is clearest and most ple ntiful in old Javanese.7 so we can only 
rely on the use of the word ini if we state that we have a text written in old mal ay. If this determination 
is correct, we seem to be dealing with a variety of  old malay that had borrowed heavily from Javanese 
vocabulary, as has happened to the malay language t ime and again throughout the centuries of its histo ry. 
This makes sense in view of the artefact’s likely o rigin in Java. 
several other old malay inscriptions have been foun d in Java, some of them on big stones unlikely 
to have been imported from outside Java.8 Whether this means that there were non-Javanese et hnic groups 
living in Java, who used malay language for inscriptions, or whether old malay was  already a lingua 
franca  there in the way that later forms of malay would b e used in later centuries, is not a question than 
can be answered at this time. Unfortunately, we have to accept that no c onclusions can be drawn from 
these linguistic issues for the question whether ou r plaque was engraved in or outside Java, and wheth er 
its donor, da hawang payangan, lived in Java and was (ethnically) Javanese or not.
Materializing SEA8_Griffiths.ind120   120 4/3/2013   11:58:23 PM

--- [Page 3] ---
121The InscrIpTIon on an embossed Image of ŚIv a In gold leaf fro m cenTral Ja v a, IndonesIa
Notes
1. mnI a24/517b (bianchini 1995: 44‒5; Webb 1999: 44‒5). This image is also discussed in the article by pauline 
lunsingh scheurleer (chapter 7) in this volume (see also fig. 7.4).
2. mnI 685b/3332/a205 (bianchini 1995: 68‒9; Webb 1999: 70).
3. on the early history of use of the term deyadharma  in Indian buddhist inscriptions, see bhattacharya (1987). for 
the most convincing explanation of the term itself,  see von hinüber (2004: 177ff). starting from the c anonical usage 
of the corresponding pāli form deyadhamma , this author assumes the meaning “thing, object” f or dhamma  in this 
compound. hence the original meaning must be “somet hing that is to be given”. one may perhaps interpre t pa-
deya-an  as an attempt to express a particular understandin g of the literal meaning of the compound deyadharma . 
see note 5.
4. see e.g. g. bhattacharya’s contribution “epigraphy  and palaeography” in bautze-picron (1998), pp. 15‒ 8. 
bhattacharya mentions (p. 15) that “although the term is buddhistic, it occurs als o in the donative inscriptions of 
hindu images of the 8th–13th century included in this catalogue”.
5. a comparable old Javanese example of derivation from a sanskrit base is papuṇyan  (from skt. puṇya  “merit”), but 
this seems to indicate a “place for accumulating merit” in all cont exts known to me. similarly, the fully indigenous 
derivation pavehan  (from veh “to give”) means “place/object of donation”.
6. I thank Uri Tadmor for this observation. he adds in an email of 2 april 2011: “pos sessive constructions of the type 
bukunya Budi  ‘budi’s book’ only entered Indonesian in the 18th/19th century as Javanese and sundanese i nfluence. 
It is not found in classical malay or indeed in mod ern standard malay or vernaculars used in malaysia,  sumatra and 
borneo, where simple juxtaposition with the order possessed-possessor is used to expre ss this ( buku Budi ).”
7. It is normally spelled ḍa in inscriptions that are indisputably in old Javan ese, but it must be realized that the 
distinction between the signs d and ḍ is not consistently made in the relevant script. see damais (1970: 965) for a  
list of epigraphical attestations of this ḍa up to the middle of the 10th century.
8. see Jordaan and colless (2009: 194–9): appendix b, “Śrīvijaya and the old malay inscri ptions of Java”.
References
bautze-picron, claudine (1998), The art of eastern India in the collection of the M useum für Indische Kunst, Berlin . berlin: 
reimer.
bhattacharya, gouriswar (1987), “dāna-deyadharma: donation in early buddhist records (in brāhmī)”, in Investigating 
Indian art , ed. marianne Yaldiz and Wibke lobo. berlin: museum für Indische Kunst, pp. 39‒60.
bianchini, marie-claude (coordination éd.) (1995), Les ors de l’archipel indonésien . paris: réunion des musées 
nationaux.
casparis, J.g. de (1956), Selected Inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th Centu ry A.D . bandung: masa baru (prasasti Indonesia 
II).
damais, louis-charles (1968), “bibliographie indoné sienne IX. les publications épigraphiques du servic e archéologique 
de l’Indonésie”, Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  54: 295–521.
______ (1970), Répertoire onomastique de l’épigraphie javanaise . paris: École française d’extrême-orient.
griffiths, arlo (2011), “Inscriptions of sumatra: further data on the epigraphy of the musi and batang hari river basins”, 
Archipel  81: 139–75.
hinüber, oskar von (2004), Die Palola Ṣāhis: Ihre Steininschriften, Inschrifte n auf Bronzen, Handschriftenkolophone und 
Schutzzauber: Materialien zur Geschichte von Gilgit und Chilas . mainz: philipp von Zabern.
Jordaan, r.e. and b.e. colless (2009), The Mahārājas of the Isles: the Śailendras and the problem of Śrīvijaya . leiden: 
University of leiden, department of languages and cultures of southeast asia and o ceania (semaian 25).
Webb, Jennifer (ed.) (1999), Indonesian gold: treasures from the National Museum, Jakarta . brisbane: Queensland art 
gallery.
Materializing SEA8_Griffiths.ind121   121 4/3/2013   11:58:23 PM

--- [Page 4] ---
iiiMATERIALIZING 
SOUTHEAST ASIA’S PAST
Selected Papers from the 12th International Conference of the
European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists, Volume 2
Edited by
Marijke J. Klokke and Véronique Degroot
 
Materializhing SEA_Front Matter.3   3 4/3/2013   11:33:43 PM

--- [Page 5] ---
iv© 2013 Marijke J. Klokke and Véronique Degroot 
Published by :
NUS Press  
National University of Singapore 
AS3-01-02, 3 Arts Link
Singapore 117569
Fax:      (65) 6774-0652
E-mail:   nusbooks@nus.edu.sg
Website:  http://www.nus.edu.sg/nuspress
ISBN   978-9971-69-655-9 (Paper)
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, m ay not be reproduced in any form or by any means, e lectronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording or an y information storage and retrieval system now know n or to be 
invented, without written permission from the Publisher. 
National Library Board, Singapore Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
European Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists. International Conference  (12t h: 2008: Leiden)
Materializing Southeast Asia’s past: selected paper s from the 12th International Conference of the Eur opean 
Association of Southeast Asian Archaeologists. V olume 2 / edited by Marijke  J. Klokke and Véronique Degroot. -- 
Singapore: NUS Press, c2013. 
  p. cm.
  ISBN: 978-9971-69-655-9 (pbk.)    
   
1.  Excavations (Archaeology)--Southeast Asia--Cong resses. 2. Southeast Asia--Antiquities--Congresses.  I.  Klokke, 
Marijke J.     II.  Degroot, Véronique.     III.  Title.    
DS523
959.01 -- dc23  OCN 816330621
Front cover image :  Bakong first enclosure, Prasat 2 and 3 (Photograph: Martin Polkinghorne)
Back cover image : Buddha image at Borobudur (Photograph: Marijke J. Klokke) 
Typeset by:  Forum, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Printed by:   C.O.S. Printers Pte Ltd
Materializhing SEA_Front Matter.4   4 4/3/2013   11:33:43 PM