--- [Page 1] ---
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014, p. 13-70Introduction12
On the basis of evidence gathered from Old Javanese textual sources—most notably 
the 9th-century Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa  kakavin  (RK) and the early 13th-century 
Sumanasāntaka3—and Central Javanese temple reliefs, I have elsewhere proposed 
to identify some igures of itinerant ascetics-cum-performers (e.g. the vidus, Old 
Jav./Skt. vidu)4 as localised counterparts of Indic prototypes, namely low-status, 
1. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre, Singapore.
2. (1) The spelling of Old Javanese words follows the system used in Acri 2011b, discussed in Acri and 
Grifiths 2014 (e.g. v for w and ә for ĕ). References to entries in the Old Javanese-English Dictionary  
(OJED, cf. Zoetmulder 1982) and Kawi-Balineesch-Nederlandsch Woordenboek  (KBNW, cf. van 
der Tuuk 1896–1912) retain the spelling as in the original; Modern Javanese and Balinese words are 
spelled in accordance with the standard modern convention. (2) I wish to thank Elisa Ganser and Roy 
Jordaan, as well as the reviewers Arlo Grifiths, Peter Worsley, and an anonymous scholar, for their 
useful comments on a draft of this article. Elisa Ganser, Roy Jordaan and Sugi Lanús are to be credited 
for providing me with the photographs that have been included here as igs. 1, 10 and 16 respectively. I 
am also grateful to Margaret Coldiron for having kindly shared with me the unpublished draft of a paper 
on Sidha Karya that she presented at the 5th EuroSEAS Conference in Naples in 2007.  
3. On the dating of these two texts, cf. Acri 2010:476–477, and Worsley et al. 2013:21–22 respectively. 
4. Vidu  = “intelligent, wise” (Monier-Williams 1899 [henceforth MW]: 963); compare vidvat  “learned” 
and vidvas , “one who knows, […] learned, intelligent, wise, […] skilled in, […] a wise man, sage, seer” 
(MW 964). Varia
AndreA  Acri 1
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans: 
(Re-)Tracing the Indic Roots of some Ancient and Modern 
Performing Characters from Java and Bali 2

--- [Page 2] ---
Andrea Acri 14
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014antinomian practitioners belonging to the Atimārga stream of Śaivism (e.g. Pāśupatas 
or Kārukas).5 Here I take up additional passages of the two Old Javanese kakavin s, 
and point at some tantalising similarities between the performances described there 
and those enacted by 19th-century Javanese and contemporary Balinese performers. 
In so doing, I aim to “historicize” these igures and the performances linked to them, 
and pinpoint their connections with, if not trace their origins to, analogous igures 
and milieux—at once performative, ritual, and/or ascetic—known from the South 
Asian Sanskritic tradition.6
Various attempts to trace genres and players in the rich and diverse tradition of 
Javano-Balinese performing arts—including dance, masked performance, recital, 
and puppetry—to an Indic past have been made so far. Stutterheim (1956a [1935]), 
followed by Becker (2004 [1993]),7 linked some modern Javanese  performers to 
premodern counterparts, whose pedigree they traced to religious igures known 
from the South Asian Śaiva tradition; although their approach is rigorous and their 
hypotheses are convincing, their conclusions need to be ine-tuned in the light of 
newly available textual and visual evidence, and especially of our better historical 
grasp of Śaivism in both South Asia and Nusantara. Studies by Sedyawati (1982) 
and Lopez y Royo-Iyer (1991, 1998, 2003) on dance performances portrayed on 
Central Javanese temple reliefs did not go beyond the identiication of the formal 
features displayed by the dancing characters and their links to karaṇa -poses as 
codiied in the Sanskrit Nāṭyaśāstra .8 Soedarsono (1984) convincingly traced the 
origin of Modern Javanese shadow play ( wayang ), dance drama ( wayang wong ), 
masked-dance ( matapukan, raket ), as well as analogous Balinese forms, to the 
ancient Central and East Javanese kingdoms (9th–15th century AD) on the basis of 
5. Cf. Acri 2011a. For wider-ranging studies on the enigmatic allegorical sections of Sargas 24 and 25 of 
the RK , cf. Acri 2008 and 2010. On the Atimārga and Mantramārga traditions of Śaivism, cf. Sanderson 
1988, 2006, 2009:45. My use of the adjective “antinomian” throughout this article refers to the taboo-
breaking practices (and the ideologies underpinning them) ascribed to Atimārga asceticism and the 
“left-hand” Tantric traditions of the Mantramārga, which consciously transcended the rules of purity 
and the socio-ritual conventions asserted by the Brahmanical ideology among the Indicized societies of 
premodern South and Southeast Asia.
6. I do not intend to rule out the possibility that the origin of these complex and multifarious characters 
may have been pre-Indic, insofar as Indic styles of performance and religious fashions were adopted 
by preexisting local practitioners, whom scholars have tended to call “shamans”, without taking much 
trouble to explain that category. But the fact remains that we simply have no evidence apart from the 
Indic one; moreover, it is often the case that the “shamans” of the (modern) Malay-Indonesian world, 
whether in “tribal”, rural, or urban contexts, display Indic features. 
7. Cf. also Holt (1967:113–115).
8. Sedyawati (1982) divides the dances depicted on the Borobudur and Prambanan reliefs into the 
two categories of “Indic” (i.e. Sanskritic, mainly Nāṭyaśāstra -based) and “local/indigenous/popular”, 
on the basis of (1) their stylistic adherence or deviance to “common standards” and criteria of beauty 
codiied in Indian classical texts, (2) their seemingly comical character, (3) their connection with “folk” 
or rural settings. This distinction, as well as the criteria on the basis of which it is conceptualized, is 
problematic. As we will see, there is a high degree of permeability and entanglement between “Indic” 
and “local” traditions, which are often bridged in the case of performance.

--- [Page 3] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 15
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014the occurrence of this terminology in epigraphic and manuscript documents,9 yet he 
did not provide concrete text-historical evidence linking with speciic groups and 
traditions. The same critique could be directed to the otherwise excellent studies by 
Emigh (1984, 1996) and Coldiron (2005a, 2005b, 2007), who limited themselves to 
posit a common, and rather generic, “Tantric root” for South Asian (i.e. Orissan) and 
Javano-Balinese masks and masked performers. 
As concluded by Coldiron (2005b) in her discussion of the Balinese Sidha Karya 
and the Japanese Okina (among others), although information concerning the sources 
of these masks is “lost in the murky world of myth and legend” and hampered by 
“the paucity of documentary records concerning ritual and theatrical performance” 
(p. 243), there is “a growing body of iconographic and archaeological evidence that 
points to an Indic origin […] but there are still some signiicant gaps” (p. 228). The 
aim of this article is to ill some of the remaining gaps by linking dispersed fragments 
of evidence from literary texts and temple reliefs from the 9th–15th century Central 
and East Javanese kingdoms, ethnographic accounts from the late 19th century 
Muslim courts of Surakarta and Yogyakarta, and modern Balinese temple-centred 
performances. My concern here is primarily to provide scholars of Indonesian (and 
Indian) performance traditions with additional textual data that may open up new 
directions for comparative research taking into account the historical, religious, and 
ritual aspects of these phenomena from a supralocal perspective.10 Even though I will 
not uphold any speciic theoretical framework, I will nonetheless briely characterise 
the philosophical and ritual rationales underpinning many of the performances 
discussed here, and individuate the socio-cultural trajectories behind the localised 
developments of the performers, who adapted to changing circumstances and 
external inluences (e.g. Islamization and/or Western “modernization”) by adopting 
new modes of engagement with audiences, patrons, and prevalent religious and/
or ritual fashions. Further, engaging with the view that such fringe Śaiva ascetic 
groups as the Kāpālikas were no institutionalized orders but mainly the product 
of the “prescriptive imagination” of South Asian landscapes (White 2005:9), my 
contribution will offer a preliminary answer to the vexed question as to whether, 
and to what extent, textual accounts and visual documents from the premodern Indic 
world did ever relect actual social realities. 
Peacocks and Pigeons, Bards and Dancers
Starting from the hypothesis that playful allegory was extensively used in ancient 
Javanese textual and visual documents as a means to criticize rival religious and 
9. On which, cf. also Holt 1967:281–289.
10. As such, my discussion is to be considered still provisional; a larger and wider-ranging project that 
I hope to be able to pursue in the future will have to take into account the vast amount of data from 
Tantric Buddhist traditions of South, Central, and East Asia (cf. below, fn. 98 and 117), as well as from 
the (early) modern Javanese antinomian traditions of performances that have been regarded as Sui in 
nature and origin, but which perhaps may also be traceable to pre-Islamic (that is, Indic) “prototypes”. 

--- [Page 4] ---
Andrea Acri 16
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014political factions, I have analysed RK  24.111–115 and 25.19–22 as a satire of the 
kuvoṅ , an enigmatic bird that is linked with the no-less enigmatic igure of the 
vidu (Acri 2011a). Given their religious function, vagrant and unattached lifestyle, 
and leaning toward performance, singing and buffoonery, I argued that the vidus 
represent a localized development of Indic ascetic igures, possibly belonging to the 
Pāśupata or Kāruka division of the Śaiva Atimārga.
I begin my analysis by taking up once again Sargas 24 and 25 of the RK , and 
focus on two avian characters portrayed there as dancers and performers respectively, 
namely the peacock ( mrak ) and the wild pigeon ( ḍarapati ). The latter is explicitly 
linked to the pirus  (Old Jav.), a performer who will be discussed throughout this 
article. Stanzas 105–106 of Sarga 24 describe a scene involving some sort of dance 
enacted by a ḍarapati  and a peacock:11
kәmbaṅ niṅ jambu kerir sumavur i valakaṅ niṅ mrāk ya maṅigәl
yāṅkәn jәnvanya madyus riya makin agiraṅ darpān kararaban
līlābhāvān vugatnyāṅjiriṅi maṅicipir yan keḍak akәcәk
nāṅ nәp mās tulya maṅliṅ kadi pamugari niṅ kayvāra kabharan
The lowers of a jambu -tree were blown and spread over the back of a dancing peacock.  
These [lowers] were like its jәnu-unguent [worn by dancers]; it bathed in them, and became more 
and more joyful and excited as they fell all around.
In a playful mood it raised its tail, moving swiftly back and forth while [simultaneously] shaking12 
and chattering.
The [fruits of the] nәp-tree were like gold, murmuring like the missiles [falling down from] an 
overladen ig-tree.13
jātīkaṅ pārijātānaravata marurū riṅ kuṇḍi kanaka
simsim gantiṅ magantiṅ gagana kadi hudan ṅkā tulya sumavur
byaktāveh bhūṣaṇā niṅ mrak agә lәm aṅigәl tavvaṅnya sugәma
meṅin mamrih mamaṇḍak ḍarapati vәlu vok yekāpipiruṣa
Naturally the parijāta -trees dropped down in golden vessels, rings and earrings alternately in the 
sky, as rain they were spreading out there.
Manifestly these provided embellishments for the peacock, which was never tired of dancing; its 
call was like that of the sugәm -bird.14
Filled with desire, a ḍarapati  made an effort to bend low [in a dancing-position]; it was [like] a 
dwarf, [the] bearded [one], wishing to act like a pirus .
11. As Old Javanese third person pronouns do not have the category of number, it is dificult to 
determine whether the characters described in these stanzas form a couple or a larger group; here I have 
opted for the former scenario.
12. This is a hapax of uncertain meaning; cf. OJED (859) s.v. keḍak : “(from iḍak?) shaken?”
13. Cf. OJED 2321, s.v. pamugari : “Does the kayw āra  (see hara ; here rendered with kalpataru  by Bal. 
com.) ‘bombard’ with lowers?”
14. Sugәma , which occurs only in 24.106 and Rāmaparaśuvijaya  8.8 (a late kakavin  from Bali), is 
glossed in OJED (1833) thus: “Is it arealis to sugĕm ? Is sugĕma  perhaps the female (male?) of the 
male (female?) hadawa  or darapati ?”; as Zoetmulder suggests, on the unique basis of the late Sri 
Tañjuṅ (1.10), sugәm  would be the “name of a big wild pigeon (green with brown breast).” If irrealis to 
sugәm , the expression could convey the sense that the peacocks are trying to imitate the call of the wild 
pigeons, implying that the peacocks are inviting them to join the dance. For an alternative explanation, 
cf. below, footnote 23.

--- [Page 5] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 17
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014The similes evoked in the stanzas revolve around the trope of “peacocks dancing 
for rain,” which is well attested in both Old Javanese and Sanskrit literature.15 
Here the “rain” is metaphorically characterized as a shower of lowers and fragrant 
unguents, which “embellish” the excited dancing peacock as if they were the typical 
“offerings” bestowed upon dancers by patrons, namely golden ornaments, and a 
cosmetic unguent (Jav. boreh ).16 The association of peacock with dance (and dancers) 
is well established in both the Indic and Javano-Balinese traditions. The Nāṭyaśāstra  
(prob. 200 BC–200 AD) codiies the “posture of the peacock” as one of the karaṇa s 
(mayūralalita ); a link between the peacock and certain Javanese dance styles may be 
detected (cf. below: 26–28).17 
The peacock is associated with a Śaiva milieu, as it is both the vehicle ( vāhana ) 
and banner of Siva’s son, the warrior-god Kumāra (also known as Skanda or 
Kārttikeya). The link between the peacock and a category of devotees of that god is 
made explicit in the “sister stanza” to RK 24.105–106, namely RK 25.24cd:18
aji saṅ kumāra aji niṅ mrak arūm 
majule makuñcir agә lәm maṅigә l
The teaching of the illustrious Kumāra is the teaching of the graceful peacocks; 
They act thoughtlessly, wear a tuft on the top of the head, and are never tired of dancing.
These lines may allude to the sect known in Sanskrit sources from South Asia 
as the Kaumāras, who worshiped Śiva’s son as their paramount deity. This group, 
especially popular in the southern regions of the Indian Subcontinent, was one of 
the six theistic Brahmanical cults ( ṣaṇmata ) approved by the  non-dualist  Vedāntin 
Śaṅkara around the 8th century.19 The reference to the strenuous practice of dance 
apparently alludes to the dances of ritual or devotional character performed in 
honour of Kumāra—possibly by Kaumāra practitioners. The Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai ,  
 
 
 
15. According to various Old Javanese texts studied by Zoetmulder (1974:200–201), “when it hears the 
rumbling of thunder in the distance, announcing the coming rains and the blossoming forth of lowers, 
the peacock starts dancing and ‘shouting’ for exuberant joy.” A verse in Kālidāsa’s Raghuvaṃśa  (16.14) 
presents the image of sporting peacocks ( krīḍāmayūra— compare līlābhāva  in KR 24.105c) fond of 
dancing at the sound of drums ( mṛdāṅga ).
16. Cf. OJED (739) s.v. jĕnu: “a cosmetic unguent, boreh . The ingredients include lowers, and it is 
fragrant. It is also used by men (before battle, dance; it can fall out of the air like rain).”
17. Cf. also Holt 1967:97: “Of dance movements which discernibly derive from the imitation of 
animals, the most widespread perhaps are postures and motions based on those of birds and other 
winged creatures.”
18. On the relationship or “concordance” between certain allegorical stanzas of Sarga 24 and 25 of the 
RK, cf. Acri 2010:481.
19. These included (mainstream)  Śaivas, Vaiṣṇavas, Śāktas, Gāṇapatyas, Kaumāras, and Sauras .

--- [Page 6] ---
Andrea Acri 18
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014a prob. 6–7th century Caṅkam Tamil poem devoted to the worship of Skanda/
Murukaṉ, describes the kuravai20 dance as follows:
“… hillmen dance the kuravai  to the toṇṭaka  drum, inebriated by the liquor made from honey, 
which matured in the long bamboos” (194–197, see Hardy 1983:618).
As Hardy points out, the kuravai  is in the poem implicitly linked to Murukaṉ; 
the Kalittokai  makes an explicit reference to the religious signiicance of the dance, 
which is done “to please the god who lives on the mountains.” On the basis of his 
analysis of the early and later strata of the Caṅkam poetic corpus, Hardy (1983:620) 
expressed the opinion that “the poetry is dealing with a real dance form of the ancient 
Tamils, or better, that behind the poetic coding a real dance may be assumed.” He 
deduced that at least three varieties of kuravai  were danced by priests and laity of 
both sexes, and that the sources
agree on the whole on the orgiastic, wild and ecstatic character of the dance. We hear constantly of 
liquor, and sometimes of “wild, iery, frenzied.” Moreover, the irst two types are both connected 
with Murukaṉ. 
Hart (1987:470–471) documents the curious fact that in ancient South India many 
different categories of performers as well as the priests of Murukaṉ were regarded as 
belonging to lower groups, who lived at the margins of society, and were associated 
with wilderness, possession, and ierce rituals. According to Venkataraman 
(1956:312),
[Kumāra] was believed to induce violent passions of love in the minds of girls, and was propitiated 
by magic rites. His priests and priestesses, wearing clusters of veṅgai lowers ( Pterocarpum 
marsupium ) dripping with honey, sang and danced the veriyāṭṭam or the kuravai […]. The great 
town of Kaveripattinam, near the mouth of the Kāverī, witnessed numerous festivals in His honour, 
when women danced to the accompaniment of the lute, harp, and drum. 
Many elements of the Tamil dances described above resonate with the image 
portrayed in stanza 25.24 of the RK. The word arūm in line c,  beside “beautiful, 
elegant,” can also mean “sweet, fragrant” (OJED 1569), which in this context may 
allude to both the beauty of the peacock and the clusters of lowers “dripping with 
honey” worn by Kaumāra devotees (compare also the “liquor made from honey” 
inebriating the dancers described in the Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai ). Kuñcir , a rare Old 
Javanese word that is only attested in RK 5.65 and 25.24, means “crest” (compare 
Bahasa Indonesia kuncir, “cowlick”), being perhaps related to kuñcit , “a crest or tuft 
on the back of the head”? (OJED 927); it might thus allude to the crest on the head 
of the peacock and, at the same time, to the “crest-hair” or tuft worn by Kaumāra  
 
 
20. In modern Tamil, kuravai  means “chorus of shrill sounds made by women by wagging the tongue, 
uttered on festive occasions”—compare Malayalam kurava , “shouting (especially of women)”; among 
the Todas, it means “shouting dance” (Hardy 1983:621). 

--- [Page 7] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 19
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014practitioners.21 The form  majule “inattentive, thoughtless, frivolous, empty-headed” 
(OJED 752) may refer to the cliché behaviour of “drunken” or “intoxicated” peacocks, 
and to the fact that the Kaumāras danced thoughtlessly—as if in a trance, probably 
under the effect of the “violent passions of love” induced through possession by the 
God (or some excitant substance?).22 
Let me now turn to the other avian igure portrayed in Sarga 24.106 of the RK, i.e. 
the ḍarapati  or “wild pigeon,” which seemingly joins the peacock’s dance. Ḍarapati  
was translated as “turtle-dove” by Hooykaas (1958:275) and “wood-pigeon” 
by Santoso (1980:801). Curiously, the word is not listed in OJED; Zoetmulder 
apparently connected it to the (itself obscure) form sugәma , occurring in 24.106c, 
about which he noted: “Is it arealis to sugĕm ? Is sugĕma  perhaps the female (male?) 
of the male (female?) hadawa  or darapati ?” (OJED 1833).23 Haḍava  (= harava , 
kaḍava ), attested only in RK 25.11 and Rāmaparaśuvijaya  8.8, is glossed by OJED 
(570, 592) as “wood pigeon” and (762) “a kind of wood-pigeon (Juynboll: Columbia 
Aenea ).”24 Whatever the identity of this bird may be, the line under discussion depicts 
it with evident comical traits, i.e. while trying to bend low in a particular dancing 
position ( mamaṇḍak ),25 thereby looking like a “dwarf” ( vәlu),26 and being “bearded” 
21. The kuravai  dance is in Tamil Caṅkam poems often connected to “hillmen” ( kuriñci ) and to a 
mountainous setting. That ( ma)kuñcir  might constitute a playful anagram evocating the Old Tamil word 
kuriñci  is not without the realm of possibility; in fact, the whole Sarga 25 abounds in double-entendres 
and other sophisticated igures of speech.
22. The image of “drunken peacocks ” in connection with another mainstream Śaiva congregation is 
documented in Sanskrit inscriptional evidence, which attests to the existence of the Mattamayūras 
(meaning precisely “drunken peacocks”) in various parts of the Indian Subcontinent by the 11th century. 
Given their seemingly “orthodox” status, Davis (2000:133) argues that “The monks of the Drunken 
Peacock lineage gained their name from the monastic center Mattamayūra, apparently, and not by 
emulating the kind of wild behavior we might expect of inebriated peacocks.” The other way around, 
however, might also have been the case, namely that the monastic, Saiddhāntika embodiment of the 
11th-century Mattamayūras represents a “domesticated” version of an in origin ascetic, performance-
oriented group of Śaiva anchorites, whose practices may have been related to those of the Kaumāras.  
Further research is needed to clarify the matter.
23. A Balinese legend explaining the origin of the different types of rice used in the ceremony of 
the masked-dance of Sidha Karya (on which, cf. below) links the yellow sugәm  bird to yellow rice 
(coloured with turmeric, also used for the boreh  unguent), and the black dara  (pigeon) to black rice 
(Rubin and Sedana 2007:111). Interpreted in this light, the connection between the sugәma  of stanza 
106c and the peacocks may be that the latter have become yellow (due to the rain of jәnu-unguent, made 
of turmeric) like sugәm  birds. 
24. Harava  is a hapax, attested only in RK 24.108; kaḍava  occurs in a passage quoted in KBNW, s.v. 
bhāradwāja , along with vuru-vuru  (dove), which the Balinese commentary glosses as sugәm. The Navaruci  
(31.24) describes the kaḍava  as a bird living in trees ( pakṣi riṅ kayon ) and having a loud cry ( śabda aguṅ ).
25. Cf. OJED (1251), s.v. ( ma)maṇḍak : “(a position of the body in dancing) to bend low, stoop?,” from 
paṇḍak , “short, low, dwarish.”
26. Cf. wĕlu  II (OJED 2241): “(among the physical defects) suffering from a hernia or rupture”; 
compare wĕlū  I “girth, circumference,” awĕlū  “round, full, curved, bent, drawn (of a bow),” mahawĕlū  
“to bend (draw) to its full extent (bow),” and wĕlu  III = wwal  “dwarf”; compare Hooykaas 1958:275, 
and Proto-Austronesian Glossary (Wolff 2010:899) luŋ, *eluŋ, *beluŋ  “curved, bent” (cf. Mod. Jav. 
mε-lung “bend, be bowed”).

--- [Page 8] ---
Andrea Acri 20
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014or “hairy” ( vok).27 The verbal form apipiruṣa  occurring in stanza 106 of the RK 
attracted the attention of van Naerssen (1937:460), who traced it to the root pirus  
and suggested translating it as “trying/wishing to act like a pirus .” According to 
OJED (1368), pirus  denotes “a certain type of performer or musician (but which?).” 
Van Naerssen argued that the pirus  was a reciter and puppet-master. In support of 
this argument he referred to the gloss of the Sanskrit kuśīlava  (“a bard, herald, actor, 
mime,” MW 297) as piruṣ  in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese lexicon Amaramālā , part 
of the larger grammatical and poetological work entitled Caṇḍakiraṇa .28 Indeed the 
Sanskrit lexicon Amarakośa (2.8.1421) associates the kuśīlava s with actors, dancers, 
and mimes ( bharatā ity api naṭāś cāraṇās tu kuśīlavāḥ ). It appears that the line of the 
RK under discussion conveys a parody of a practitioner who is playfully equated to a 
pigeon ( ḍarapati ), and associated with a comic performer known as pirus , arguably 
on account of the comic gait and/or postures that he assumes when joining the dance 
of a peacock. The elements and context of this parody will become clearer below.
A community of low-caste bards called kuśīlava s, also known as vālmīki s, 
existed in various regions of the Indian Subcontinent until recent years.29 The word 
kuśīlava  is used in the Rāmāyaṇa  to denote the two brothers Kuśa and Lava, sons 
of Rāma, both raised by the sage Vālmīki, author of the text. According to Goldman 
(2007:286), on the authority of MacDonell, “Originally the word probably meant a 
loose-living, wandering rhapsodist, and the naming and characterization of the twins 
Kuśa and Lava are probably the result of folk-etymology.” Kuśīlava  may be either a 
generic or technical term to describe a class of itinerant performers, whom Sanskrit 
legal texts characterize as despicable individuals of low ( śūdra ) status.30 In the 
27. Cf. wok (OJED 2309): “abundant hair-growth on the body (esp. under the chin, chin whiskers, beard? 
Thus ModJ).” Previous editors and translators read vәlu and vok as one word, vәluvok —a hapax of uncertain 
meaning, simply glossed by OJED (2242) as “a part. kind of bird (Balinese commentary: balĕkok ).”
28. Cf. folio 49a (Lokesh Chandra 1997:224). On account of its eulogy dedicated to the Śailendra king 
Jitendra (otherwise unknown), the Amaramālā  may date back to the 8th century or earlier. Besides 
Balinese manuscripts, it has come down to us through a 15th-century palm-leaf manuscript from West 
Java. 
29. Cf. Dhere (1996:121–123). In the online English summary of the book (in Marathi) Bhāratīya 
Raṃgbhūmīcyā Śodhāt  “In search of Indian theatre” (http://rcdhere.com/Bharatiya_Rangbhoomichya_
Shodhat/SPS-Bharatiya%20Rangbhoomichya%20Shodhat_1.html; accessed 29-07-2013), Dhere 
refers to the extended narrative poetry “ Ukhaharan  by a poet ‘Chombha’ in the Pre-Eknath era. He was 
a composer from the ‘Valmiki’ sect of composers and a folk singer in the tradition of Kushi-Lava’s.” 
Harikathā  performer Dr. Ananth Rao in an email dated 12-07-2013 mentioned a category of “itinerant 
tribal singers called kuśīlava s […] who used to go round villages [in Karṇaṭaka]. […] We occasionally 
used to see them in Bangalore too years ago. I recall them with hair tied up like jaṭās [in the fashion of 
ascetics] and looking much like Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa in the forest.” Categories of devotional and ritual 
itinerant performers of various social standing and religious afiliation continue to exist throughout 
the Indian Subcontinent down to the present day, such as e.g. the Bauls of Bengal and the Marathi 
Gondhaḷīs. The latter  are a category of performers of Śākta afiliation specializing in the dramatic rite 
of goddess worship called gondhaḷa . This ritual involves singing and dramatic performance (i.e. of oral 
narratives and ballads), and is often performed to mark an important life-cycle event such as weddings 
(cf. Dhere 1988). 
30. On which basis Raja Radhakanta Deb (1783–1867) in the Śabdakalpadruma  (vol. 2, p. 160) glossed 

--- [Page 9] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 21
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Manusmṛti  (8.65, 8.102) these are mentioned in a dvandva  compound along with the 
kāruka  (kārukakuśīlava ) as persons unit to act in the capacity of witnesses. I have 
advanced elsewhere (Acri 2011a:78–79) the hypothesis that the kārus and kāruka s 
mentioned in Sanskrit legal texts and in the Nāṭyaśāstra  are not to be interpreted 
as “artisans” or “mechanics” (√ kṛ 1) but as “singers” or “bards” (from kāru,  “one 
who sings or praises, a poet,” √ kṛ 2),31 which in turn may be linked to the obscure 
Kārukas of the Atimārga stream of Śaivism known from rare references found in 
Śaiva Saiddhāntika literature. The latter group might have constituted a category 
of ascetics who engaged in stage performances among the populace, and whose 
Javanese counterparts might have been the vidus. 
Certain elements in RK 24.106d support the hypothesis that the pirus  too 
constituted a type of Śaiva performer who was a common enough igure in the 
Javanese literary imaginaire  as early as the 9th century. One such element is the 
connection of the pirus  with the wild-pigeon, ḍarapati . Santoso (1980:801), rejecting 
van Naerssen’s (1937:460) derivation of the verbal form pipiruṣa  from pirus , traced 
it back to the Sanskrit root rūṣ, “to adorn, decorate,” but also: “to cover, smear” (MW 
886). The sense of “smear” may it here, being a reference to the ash-smear worn 
by Atimārga ascetics, and which may also hint at the smear of boreh  unguent worn 
by dancers. Of course, it may be the case that the author was punning, consciously 
envisaging double-meanings as he was in most stanzas of Sarga 24 and 25. It is 
probably the outward appearance of these Śaiva ascetics as well as their behavior 
that justiied the poet’s choice of the ḍarapati  as their alias: the wood pigeon or 
ring dove, Streptopelia risoria , is ash-grey-coloured, with a black collar around the 
neck. The rather comical way in which pigeons “rhythmically” shake their heads 
horizontally while they walk on the ground may also play a role here.32 Vok, “bearded” 
or “hairy,” is frequently found in sarga  24 and 25 of RK  as an epithet of wandering 
ascetics (probably referring to their prominent hairdos and beards), a feature which, 
as we will see below, is attributed to wandering ascetics of the Kāpālika and Siddha 
type in Sanskrit sources. RK 25.108d comically describes how a wood pigeon  
 
 
 
 
 
 
kuśīlava  as kutsitaṃ śīlaṃ yasya saḥ,  “he whose moral character is to be condemned.” The Nāṭyaśāstra  
(35.106), arguably speaking from the perspective of an “insider” in the world of performing arts, gives a 
fully positive etymology: “He who can apply the principles of instrumental music ( ātodya ) and is himself 
an expert in playing instruments, is called a kuśīlava  because of his being clever ( kuśala ) and reined 
(avadāta ) and free from agitation ( avyathita )” (quoted and translated in Gomperts 2002:580–581).
31. Here the sufix - ka may be either expletive or pejorative; the latter possibility is the most plausible.
32. Cf. below: 33-34, 45 .

--- [Page 10] ---
Andrea Acri 22
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014(harava  = ḍarapati ) and a wild pigeon ( vuru-vuru), allegorically representing an 
emaciated ascetic and a beggar respectively, turn into their opposites:
tañ jīrṇāṅjīrṇa meñjuh ṅ harava harivuvun veh-veh vuru-vuru
Not worn out [as a consequence of ascetic penance], the wood pigeon becomes fresh, elated; the 
wild pigeons care about giving alms [instead of begging for food].
Veh-veh is the technical expression used in Old Javanese texts to indicate the 
action of giving alms to religious people.33 Here it may represent the opposite of 
alap-alap (“to steal, seize, carry off”),34 which relects the pigeon’s typical feeding 
habit. The allegorical depiction of ascetics as pigeons is found in several Sanskrit 
Śaiva Siddhāntatantras, which link categories of ascetics ( yati) to birds according to 
their particular conducts ( vṛttivaiśeṣika ); some are described as acting “like pigeons” 
(kapotavat , kāpota ), i.e. living on whatever they may ind on the ground, such as 
fallen grains or leftovers.35 
The use of the hapax ḍarapati  in RK 24.126d, literally “lord/master of the 
pigeons,” in place of the more common darā  (OJED 365) or harava/haḍava, 
arguably  betrays a pun. If we break the compound into its two constituents, i.e. the 
Sanskrit and Old Javanese dāra  “wife” (which, according to OJED 365, becomes 
ḍara  (= rara) in such expressions as anak ḍara   “girl, maiden”) and the Sanskrit pati 
“master, lord,” then the compound may be alternatively translated as “the lord of the 
maidens ( ḍara ).” If the pirus  is indeed a Śaiva Tantric performer, he could naturally 
be regarded as a “master” of dancing-girls. This connection will become clearer later 
on in the article.
The character of the  pirus  was discussed by van Naerssen in his study of the 
Sangsang copperplate inscription, issued by king Balituṅ in 907 AD to ratify the 
granting of tax-exempt status to the monastery of Dalinan. To celebrate that event a 
variety of performances were offered (plate II.9–10);36 some of these appear to have 
been of a sacred or ritual type as they were given by the religious functionaries known 
as taṅkil hyaṅ s (Old Jav.),37 while others were offered to the god.38 Although the 
syntactical structure of the passage is not transparent and, therefore, it is not entirely 
33. Cf. Dharma Pātañjala  264.3 (Acri 2011b:264–265), and Vṛhaspatitattva  25.3, which glosses Skt. 
dāna  with Old Jav. veveh .
34. The form alapan  occurs next to vuru-vuru  in RK 25.65.  OJED (46) notes that the form aṅalapi  is in 
kidung s “frequently said of the clearing away of food after the meal, when the servants get it.”
35. Cf. Barazer-Billoret 2001. The passages in question, i.e. Suprabheda  6.32cd–33ab and Kiraṇa  
9.15cd–16ab, have close parallels in other Siddhāntatantras, e.g. Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama  35. 
36. […] hinyūnnakan tontonan mamidu saṅ taṅkil hyaṅ si nalu macaritta bhimma kumāra maṅigal 
kīcaka si jaluk macarita rāmāyaṇa mamirus mabañol si muṅmuk si galigī mavayaṅ buatt hyaṅ macarita 
bimma ya kumāra  […] (Sarkar 1972 I:96).
37. Cf. OJED 1943: “a certain (religious?) functionary (nomen loci?).” The taṅkil hyaṅ s are said to 
recite stories ( macarita ) alongside vidus also in Sumanasāntaka  113.4 (cf. Acri 2011a:70–71).
38. Cf. OJED 238 s.v. bwat hyaṅ : “ceremonies (performances, etc.) in worship of the god (in the temple).”

--- [Page 11] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 23
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014clear who performed what, it mentions various individuals staging performances 
that involved play-acting and buffoonery ( mamidu , from vidu, mamirus , from pirus ), 
jesting ( mabañol ), recitation ( macarita ), dance ( maṅigal ), and puppetry ( mavayaṅ ). 
A recitation and puppet-show of a story entitled “ b(h)imma kumāra ” was performed,39 
along with a dance of the kīcaka ,40 and the enactment of what might have been a 
comic version of the Rāmāyaṇa . 
Van Naerssen (1937:458–459) noted several analogies in terminology and context 
between the above-mentioned passage of the Sangsang inscription and a series of 
stanzas of 13th-century East Javanese kakavin  Sumanasāntaka  by Mpu Monaguṇa; he 
quoted the stanzas in extenso without translating or commenting upon them, simply 
stating that “there is no need to indicate point for point the many agreements with the 
description in the inscriptions. For this, let us just compare this quotation with our 
inscriptions.”41 I now proceed to analyse in detail the account of the Sumanasāntaka , 
which bears striking resemblances with RK 24.106, and which may cast some light 
on the pirus  and the context of his performances.
Stanzas 3–4 of canto 113, part of the larger sequence 1–9, provide intriguing 
textual evidence on some (apparently Śaiva) igures of ascetic-cum-performers 
(cf. Acri 2011a:70–71). They depict a most remarkable performance staged on the 
occasion of the wedding of prince Aja and Indumatī. The performance, enacted 
by vidus, taṇḍa s (Old Jav.), and taṅkil hyaṅ s, is religious as much as burlesque in 
character.42 The wedding ceremony starts with a puriicatory ritual ( tavur ) conducted 
by an experienced (female?) master ( viku vṛddhacārī ), who intones the ive 
39. The expressions bimma  kumāra  and bhima ya kumāra  have been interpreted by Sarkar (1972 
I:98) as indicating “the son ( kumāra ) of Bhīma,” with reference to the demon, and popular Wayang-
character, Ghaṭotkaca (Sarkar unwarrantly read the second occurrence of the words as bhīmayakumāra , 
standing for bhīmaja -kumāra  “Kumāra , born from Bhīma”). On the other hand, if one interprets, 
with Zoetmulder (1974:208–209), Kīcaka as a personal name, and Kumāra as meaning “young” (or: 
“lover”), one may envisage a reference to the character dancing the role of Kīcaka ighting Bhīma, an 
episode narrated in both the Sanskrit and Old Javanese versions of the Virāṭaparva , the fourth book of 
the Mahābhārata . According to Zoetmulder, the repetition of the words bhīma kumāra  would indicate 
that different genres or performance styles of the same narrative took place. Supomo (1995:323), while 
noting that “there is no evidence that a Javanese translation or adaptation of the Mahābhārata  already 
existed at that time,” speculated that “the narrator of the Bhīma-kumāra  episode recited a Sanskrit text, 
and then, as in a harikathā,  explained it to his audience in Javanese.” While Zoetmulder’s hypothesis 
remains plausible, alternative explanations are possible (cf. below: 52, and the following footnote). 
40. The word kicaka /kīcaka /kecaka  may denote a type of dance, or dancer, rather than be a personal 
name, as it seems to be attested in the former sense in Old Javanese inscriptions of 10th and early 
11th century (e.g. copperplate of Pelem of 971 AD [I.5], and prasasti  of Cane from East Java of 
1021 AD [v. 14], cf. Brandes 1913:118, 127). OJED (862) glosses kicaka , kecaka  as “performer of a 
particular dance?” It is not altogether impossible that both words could be related to the Balinese kecak  
dance—originally a temple trance ritual performance accompanied by a male chorus, transformed and 
re-arranged in the 1930s by Walter Spies (cf. de Zoete and Spies 1973:80–85).
41. My translation from the original Dutch.
42. The level of detail and the spontaneity of the narration leave no doubt that Mpu Monaguṇa himself 
witnessed one of such performances. An analogous assessment of the genuineness of the descriptions of 
places and events found in the Sumanasāntaka  has been made by Supomo (2001:123–125).

--- [Page 12] ---
Andrea Acri 24
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Śaiva Brahmamantras (111.6). The performance takes place during the paprasan  
ceremony; according to Hunter (in Worsley et al. 2013:575–576), the paprasan  (and 
its derivative prasprasan , apraspras ) corresponds to the modern Balinese laspas /
pelaspasan , both being
ceremonies of puriication conducted upon completion of work on a building, mask or image, or 
upon the founding of a performing arts troupe. [… T]hey share with paprasan  ceremonies the 
element of puriication upon entry to a new phase of existence whose future state of safety and good 
fortune is dependent upon the rituals of puriication carried out at the inception of the new cycle of 
life, such as that embarked upon with a marriage. 
The wedding is closed in canto 130 by the kraban kalasan  ceremony, which 
includes burlesque dances featuring a (drunk) “mistress of the Śaiva” ( strī niṅ 
śaiva ), a woman of high status ( ḍaṅ hadyan ) who performs a “peacock-dance”, 
and a “mistress of the vidu” (strī niṅ vidu ) who dances, sings, laughs, and proffers 
the paradigm of the Sanskrit personal pronoun ( Sumanasāntaka  130.1–3; Acri 
2011a:72–74). 
I now discuss stanzas 5–8 of canto 113, where comedians— pirus es and female 
performers—take the stage. Given the great number of philological problems posed 
by this passage, my translation—which at times differs considerably from that by 
Worsley et al. (2013:297–298)—is to be considered as no more than a preliminary 
attempt at best.
sahana niṅ abañol denyāṅguyvākәna puraci
aṅigәl-igәl agәṅgṅan koṇṭol paḍa mәtәtәṅ
vәlu sakәbәh agasyak ndan moghāvәdi vәkasan
kaguyu-guyu kagman yan prāptaṅ vәlu sabaṭaṅ (5)
All the comedians made [the audience] roll around laughing.43 
They were dancing furiously, engrossed in [observing? Joking about?] their [exposed] penises, 
[their faces becoming] tense with effort.44
A “dwarf” [as tall] as the span of a kәbәh45 [danced] animatedly, then became suddenly afraid at last,
He was laughed at [by the audience when] he was taken by a sudden fright46 as a “dwarf” [as tall] 
as the span of a baṭaṅ  arrived.47 
43. Here I follow Worsley et al. (2013:453–454, 498), who interpret the obscure puraci  (occurring only 
in the present line and in canto 28.8 of the Sumanasāntaka , cf. OJED 1451) as “rolling around.”
44. OJED (1348–1349), s.v. pĕtĕtöṅ */mĕtĕtöṅ  (hapax), suggests: “to pull a face?.” Worsley et al. 
(2013:498) relate it to the Modern Javanese mĕthĕnthĕng  “braced with anger or effort.” OJED (887) 
glosses the hapax  koṇṭol  as “scrotum”; however, the word kontol  in Bahasa Indonesia means “penis,” 
hence my translation.
45. The word sakәbәh  is obscure. OJED (833 and 2242) glosses kәbәh  with a question mark; Worsley 
et al. (2013:498), whom I hesitantly follow, take it to be a measure of size (referred to koṇṭol ; cf. below, 
fn. 47). Some manuscripts read sagәbәh, which could be a spelling variant of sagәbah , from gĕbah * 
(ginĕbah ) “to shake about” (OJED 505).
46. Cf. OJED (513), s.v. göm*, kagöm , kagöman : “taken by a sudden fright or astonishment (‘to fall in 
the grip of’).” I cannot identify the translation of this term in Worsley et al.
47. Cf. OJED (223), s.v. bataṅ  I: “guess, interpretation, probability”; baṭaṅ  II (224): “a measure of 
capacity (KBNW: ‘a liquid measure consisting of a long bamboo cylinder’)”; bataṅ  III “corpse.” The 

--- [Page 13] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 25
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014pirus amirusi menmen denyāmet pacәh acәmәh
rabi nika bisa pantәs denyābhāvaka maṅәyәh
laki nika mulat aṅdrәṅ kahyūn-hyūn aṅuṅas-uṅas
kadi vәḍus anut añjyan yan tәṅhā tәka muriṅis (6)
A pirus  acted the part of a menmen;48 through his dirty jokes49 he caused laughter.50 
His mistress cleverly followed “in style” by enacting [the gesture of] urinating.
As his man saw her, he looked iercely at her and sniffed, full of excitement.
He followed her and they mated, [acting] like goats; when he gazed in her eyes, he suddenly showed 
his teeth.
ikaṅ amañcaṅah olih guyv aprih paḍa sinurak
tkap ika nini-niny elik masvāmi vәrә-vәrәh
paḍa bisaṅ avayaṅ vvaṅ denyāṅguyvakәn atarik
pacәh ika kaki-kaky akrak ginyat mulih akusa (7)
Those who were reciting [tales] raised a laugh, and all of them were eager to be jeered.51
The sacred maidens52 disliked to have as masters the young male dancers.53
Those playing the human-puppets were all equally skillful, and they caused vehement laughter.
The old men were laughing with open mouths; screaming loudly, they suddenly lay sprawling on 
the ground. 
sahana nikaṅ pinaṅguṅ tūt pādv ābhinava katon
paḍa gumuruh avantus sakveh niṅ guyu gumәtәr
bari-bari kapacәh niṅ vvaṅ thānin gumuyu kә kәl
patmu ni pasurak niṅ vvaṅ kady ampuhan apagut (8)
All of those who were on the stage joined in acting like goats54—what an amazing sight!
possibility of reading vәlus abaṭaṅ  (which does not make sense) tentatively suggested by Zoetmulder 
s.v wĕlu  (OJED 2242) is unlikely, for vәlu occurs twice in the stanza, as well as in RK 24.106, precisely 
in the same context of a pirus ’ performance. Worsley et al. (2013:498) translate vәlu sabaṭang  as 
“having the circumference of one baṭaṅ ” (referred to koṇṭol ). I take the “measure of one baṭaṅ ” as 
indicating the span of the height reached by the performers during their comic dance, i.e. the low level/
baricentrum of their dancing position. Compare igs. 11 and 13 ( gajah ngombé ).
48. Following Worsley et al. (2013:299); the expression seems to imply that a pirus  mocked a menmen  
(“a player or performer”). OJED (1368) glosses amirus, amirusi, apipirus  as “to perform as a pirus ” 
(compare the reduplicated apipiruṣa  in RK 24.106d, “wish to act/perform like a pirus ”). 
49. Thus OJED (320) tentatively glosses this hapax, adding the following remarks: “see cĕmĕr , unclean, 
foul, low ( cĕmĕr  when abusing, otherwise acĕmĕr ?).”
50. Cf. OJED (1221): “probably with open mouth > merry, laughing, hilarious; astonished, amazed.”
51. Or: “to be urged on.”
52. Cf. OJED (1187): “used in designating or addressing a religious person or an unmarried princess 
or girl of noble birth.”
53. Following OJED (2246); but cf. also wĕrĕh  III: “probably a group of people (young people, see 
wĕrĕh  II?) trained for a particular performance ( awĕrĕh ).” 
54. Cf. OJED (1230), s.v. padu  II: “a particular kind of goat or sheep (connected with adu: ighting 
ram?).” OJED (1229) quotes the present line of text s.v. padu  I “corner, edge,” which does not make 
much sense; Worsley et al. (2013:498) translate pinaṅguṅ tūt padu  as “were given vantage points on the 
edge of the performance space”; but compare the previous stanza 6d, where a pirus  and his woman are 
described as mating like goats ( vәḍus ). While there is still the possibility that the focus has now shifted 
to the audience around the stage rather than the performers themselves, it seems likely to assume that 

--- [Page 14] ---
Andrea Acri 26
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014All of them were thundering, clashing against each other; the laughter roared in unison like thunder.
Unceasing was the merriment of the villagers as they laughed convulsively.
The coming together of the people’s shouting was like clashing breakers.
Mpu Monaguṇa’s fascinating account depicts male and female characters, among 
whom are a pirus  and his mistress, playing a comic performance involving dance, 
recital, and an obscene pantomime of mocking (bestial) sexual intercourse. Even 
though more than three centuries separate the above passage and the elliptic stanza 
106 of RK sarga  24, it is tempting to read the latter in the light of the former on 
account of several striking analogies and similar puns occurring in both passages. 
As RK 24.106 metaphorically describes the pirus  as a pigeon ( ḍarapati ) joining the 
dance of a peacock, so the Sumanasāntaka  seems to characterise the female dancers 
who accompany some young male performers—apparently pirus es, mentioned in 
the previous stanza—as peacocks and pigeons respectively. First, the rare form vәlu 
(“dwarf”/“low, crouching”) occurs in line 106d as a qualiier of pirus , and then again 
twice more in Sumanasāntaka  113.5 as a qualiier of abañol , “comedians,” to which 
category evidently the pirus  featuring in stanza 6 also belongs. The latter is joined 
by a female partner ( rabi nika ) on the stage; in 113.7b some “sacred maidens” ( nini-
niny,  used to address either religious people or female dignitaries) are declared to 
display dislike of having as “masters” ( masvāmi ) some young male dancers ( vәrә-
vәrәh ). This line calls to mind the form ḍarapati of RK 24.106 , which may hide a 
pun for  the “master ( pati) of the maidens ( dāra/ḍara ),” being a rare variant of the 
more common name of the pigeon, vuru-vuru .55 The scene has comic overtones as it 
is probably based on the fact that, as we know from other Old and Modern Javanese 
accounts, the “master” accompanying the dancing girls during taṇḍak  performances 
was called buyut , “elder” or “great-grandfather” (cf. below: 32, 41). The “old men” 
or “elder” ( kaki-kaki) referred to in 113.7d as laughing and sprawling on the ground 
might be buyut -like characters. If so, an analogy between the pirus  and the buyut  
may be established.
Extending the analogy further, it is interesting to note that Sumanasāntaka  130.2a 
describes the dancing style of the female dignitary (“perhaps the wife of a Brahmin,” 
Worsley et al. 2013:504) who replaces the dance of a drunk “mistress of the Śaiva” to 
the music of mṛdaṅga  drums with terms that are often associated to peacocks or birds 
in general. For instance: oṅsil (“moving to and fro”), which calls to mind the gait of 
a bird;56 akikat, which  is glossed by OJED (866)  as “of a dancer and of a peacock, 
the onlookers took part in the performance, acting like goats ( tūt padu ).
55. According to OJED (2335), wuruh  is a spelling variant of wәrәh, hence wәrә-wәrәh = wuru-wuruh  
and, by assonance and punning, wuru-wuru ; wuru  II = wĕrö  (= wĕrĕ ) also means “drunk, intoxicated” 
(awuru ) (OJED 2335)—compare vәrә-vәrә (“very drunk”) qualifying the “mistress of the Śaiva” in 
Sumanasāntaka  130.1a.
56. Cf. also the term arәṅgiṅan in Sumanasāntaka  113.9, a hapax of uncertain meaning translated by 
OJED (1538) as “to move to and fro?” (in a dance-performance). To describe the dance of peacocks, RK 
24.105c uses the form aṅicipir , “moving swiftly back and forth, lapping, jumping about” (OJED 862).

--- [Page 15] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 27
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014apparently referring to a dancing posture with the arms stretched sideways”;57 and 
aṅavat  (“introduce, lead, call up [a melody]”), which occurs in various Old Javanese 
sources in association with the dance or cry of peacocks:58
ḍaṅ hadyan tumurun gumanty aṅigәl oṅsil aṅavat akikat rumāmpayak
Then a female dignitary came down to dance in her turn moving to and fro, introducing [the melody 
of the orchestra], and assuming the “posture of the peacock,” with the arms stretched sideways. 
Worsley (et al. 2013:504), whose translation of this line only slightly differs from 
my own, comments that
the image presented in the translation here is of Balinese or Javanese dancers who move to and fro 
(ongsil ) with their arms outstretched ( rumampayak ) and lifting their feet off the ground alternatively 
(akikat ).
Brakel-Papenhuizen (1995:125–126) describes a dynamic or “hopping” dance 
posture called nayung  (from tayung , related to tayungan ; cf. below: 34–35), involving 
the alternate lifting of the feet and arms stretched and fully extending sideways, 
used by alusan  (reined male) and putri  (female) characters in Javanese dance. 
The position performed by the dancing female characters may actually be a local 
evolution (or interpretation) of the “peacock posture,” codiied in the Nāṭyaśāstra  
as karaṇa  80 (mayūralalita , “peacock’s sport”).59 A visual representation (or, again, 
interpretation) of this karaṇa  is found in a relief of the East Gopura of the Śiva  
57. Cf. OJED (866) kikat *, akikat “(of a dancer and of a peacock). Does it refer to sound (song, et 
cetera)?” Bal. comm. in LS [ Lambaṅ Salukat ] has maṅokok (see s.v. kokok ). Or is it a dancing posture?; 
OJED (885) s.v. kokok *, aṅokok: “(of the sound of the peacock, but not its cry) to cluck.” 
58. Cf. Hunter 2001:88: “Peacocks are otherwise famous in the kakawin as the providers of the ‘opening 
melody’ ( pangawwat ) for the ‘melody of the thunder’.” OJED (169) glosses aṅavat  as follows: “to 
come or go irst, precede, go in front of, be the ‘leader’, lead in, introduce, call up, esp. of the part of 
a melody, which introduces the theme before the full orchestra ( agamĕl, aṅiduṅ, surak ) joins in.” The 
passages are Haravijaya  2.11 ( aṅavatiṅ mrak ), Ghaṭotkacāśraya  2.6 ( paṅavat niṅ mrak ), 4.4 ( mrak  
[…] aṅavati gәntәr iṅ patәr ); cf. also Sumanasāntaka  130. Worsley et al. (2013:320–321, 504) read 
aṅavak , “on her own,” but admit that OJED (e.g. 866) gives the variant aṅavat,  and therefore suggest 
the alternative translation “and then proceeded to […].” I take aṅavat  to be a better reading. It is also 
worth noting that the expression aṅalik-alik , used in Sumanasāntaka  130.2b to denote the call or high-
pitched shrill of the dancing female dignitary, is the standard onomatopoetic expression used to denote 
the call of the kokila  or valik- bird (female of the kuvoṅ ) in Old Javanese literature. The cry әlik-әlik  
occurs in RK 25.19, uttered by a laughing kokila  or valik , which I have identiied with the female of 
the vidu (= kuvoṅ ) (Acri 2011a:85–86). Zoetmulder (OJED 941) noted that an ambiguity between the 
cry of the kuvoṅ  (aṅuvvan ) and that of the peacock ( anavvaṅ ) occurs in Old Javanese texts, to the point 
that the two birds were confused. On the association between the kuravai  dance in honor of Murukaṉ/
Skanda/Kumāra and the shrill of women, see above, fn. 20, and compare fn. 15.
59. Cf. Nāṭyaśāstra  4.141 (trans. Ghosh 1950:57): “After assuming the Vṛścika K. two hands to be 
Recita, and the Trika to be turned round [in the Bhramari Cāri].” In the vṛścika , the two hands are 
bent and held over the shoulders, with a leg bent and turned towards the back (p. 54); recita  [relating 
to a limb] means “moving it round separately (i.e. not in any Karaṇa or Cāri) or its drawing up or its 
movement of any kind separately” (p. 66); the trika  is the sacrum or “the lowest point in the vertebral 
column where the two other bones of the legs meet” (p. 53).

--- [Page 16] ---
Andrea Acri 28
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Naṭarāja temple at Chidambaram in South India, which shows a woman dancing in a 
low posture, with arms fully extended (ig. 1; compare igs. 2, 3, 7). 
It may be argued that the performances staged by pirus es and female dancers on 
the occasion of the royal wedding described in the Sumanasāntaka were not held 
for mere entertainment, but were also charged with religious signiicance. As we 
have seen in the Sangsang copperplate, in premodern Java magico-religious rituals 
and festivities usually conirmed royal decrees and otherwise special occasions. 
Zoetmulder (1974:208) noted that “in the ritual consecration of the grants and in 
the accompanying celebrations performances of various kinds, such as dances, 
comic acts, the recitation of texts, etc., had their place.” Sedyawati (1982:72) drew 
attention to a few panels on Borobudur depicting music-making and dancing taking 
place in the direct proximity of a caitya , thereby implying a ritual function. In spite 
of the social status of those igures, who were made the target of satire by the elite 
and mainstream religious establishment, ensembles of male and female religious 
performers were clearly involved in ceremonies carried out in close association with 
palace functionaries, or even the king himself. It is, therefore, no wonder if most of 
the performing characters discussed here, including buffoons, (masked) dancers, and 
drama reciters, are categorized in several Old Javanese inscriptions as vatәk i jro , 
i.e. persons attached to the kraton  in the capacity as functionaries or attendants; the 
same igures, on the other hand, are invariably mentioned, along with the maṅilala 
drabya haji “royal tax collectors,” as “undesirable” people who are, under normal 
circumstances, forbidden to enter religious freeholds, presumably in order not to 
disturb the activities going on in there.60 
A number of pre-11th century Old Javanese inscriptions mention pirus es besides 
other performers or players, menmen (cf. Sumanasāntaka 113.6a) ; in the Guruṅ Pai 
copperplate inscription from Bali of 1071 AD (van Stein Callenfels 1926:17, Vb1), 
both characters are characterized as performing jokes ( abañval , cf. Sumanasāntaka 
113.5a), playing the lute ( anuliṅ ) and percussion instruments ( amukul ), and said 
“to give or act in a tapuk  (masked?) performance” for the king.61 The inscription 
of Parạah II issued in 943 AD (Brandes 1913:102, lines 45–46) mentions various 
performers playing music during religious festivities held in the presence of a  
mahārāja —arguably Siṇ̣ok; as understood by Gomperts (2002:586), the king 
himself danced ( maṅigal ) to music played by musicians and men of religion on that 
60. As argued by Gomperts (2002:585–586), anyone who demanded money for their services were 
equally forbidden to carry out their activities in a freehold’s premises. Boechari (2012a:166–167, 
fn. 18) pointed out that the maṅilala drabya haji  were not necessarily tax collectors, but any court 
functionaries who did not get apanage domains and had to be paid from the state treasury (cf. also id. 
2012b:281–282, 2012c).
61. Cf. OJED (1948–1949), s.v. atapukan : tapuk * I, anapuk , tinapuk  “to appear, come forward fully 
armed or equipped); to commence with, don, take up; to act in a tapuk  (masked?) performance (see 
Pigeaud, Javaanse Volksvertoningen , p. 125; some places, however, suggest a performance with 
a percussion-instrument).” The same characters and/or activities feature in other pre-10th century 
inscriptions (e.g. the copperplate of Kuṭi of 840 AD).

--- [Page 17] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 29
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014occasion.62 The Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa , an Old Javanese text that is believed to originate 
from Siṇ̣ok’s milieu, at its very beginning describes the wonders going on in the 
king’s court, where all sorts of performances were held in temporary pavilions. Those 
mask performances, buffooneries, dances, and vidu competitions, were intended 
to accompany a ritual or religious performance ( kārya )63 that was attended by the 
king himself and taṇḍa  functionaries.64 The taṇḍa s we ind throughout premodern 
Javanese history, e.g. in RK sarga  24 and 25, where they are mocked and connected 
to the performing practices of a vidu (alias kuvoṅ -bird), in Sumanasāntaka  113.3, 
again dancing besides vidus, and in the 14th-century Deśavarṇana , which describes 
them as low-ranking court functionaries involved in mock war-dances.65 
An analogous “tension” between the low social status of the performers and 
their religious standing when they take part in certain rituals is also present in 
India. R.C. Dhere,66 elaborating on such groups of low-status performers as the 
kuśīlava s on the basis of his empirical knowledge of Indian regional popular theatre 
and performance, rightly points to the contradiction intrinsic in the fact that these 
performers, who are as a rule regarded as vile individuals living on the margin of 
society, are respected at the time of particular rituals and festivities in which they 
perform. Similarly, specialists in the performance (mimicked, recited, chanted, or 
danced) of religious narratives are considered to belong to a “learned” tradition of 
high Sanskrit culture and often associated with temples and religious institutions, yet 
at the same time are despised for their lifestyles tied to performance and performers, 
which automatically lower their social status. Among such performers were the 
kāthaka s, whom Lutgendorf (1991:124) characterizes as a category of storytellers 
who, by at least the tenth century, were considered synonymous with granthika  or 
“book specialists.” Lutgendorf explains that by the eighteenth century 
the term kathak  had come to refer to a type of storyteller, whose oral renditions of devotional texts 
were accompanied by gesture and dance and whose art eventually moved from the temple to the 
royal court, where it inluenced the development of a dance style.
62. Line 45 speaks about performers playing drums ( anabәh ) as saṅ makuvuṅ “those who lives in 
holes,” thereby testifying to a connection between a musician and a “reverend person” ( saṅ) who 
perform the observance of lying in ashes. This igure, on account of the data presented above, is likely 
to have been either a vidu or a similar kind of ascetic-cum-performer; cf. Acri 2011a:79–80.
63. As the following Sanskrit verse (untranslated in the Old Javanese prose portion) has dīkṣitaṃ  as 
its irst word, the ceremony in question may have been (connected to) a religious initiation ( dīkṣā ) or 
royal consecration. 
64. Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa , Sarga 1: […]  patapәlan, pabañolan, paṅayvan vidu, paṅigәlan, pavayaṅan, 
ṅuniveh kaḍatvana katәkana śrī mahārāja, pakuvvan, paiñjon katәkan para taṇḍa sira kabeh, kapva 
milu mabyāpāra ri kārya śrī mahārāja, rәp makuliliṅan iṅ paṅigәlan.
65. Deśavarṇana  66.5, cf. Acri 2011a:71–72. War dances appear to have been popular throughout 
Javanese history. Van Goens, who visited the kingdom of Mataram in the mid-17th century, claims 
to have attended “a dance contest between two men, one carrying a pike and the other a shield and a 
sword, accompanied by great gongs” (Sumarsam 1995:22). A relief apparently depicting a virtually 
identical ensemble of four male dancers armed with swords and pikes is panel O I 5 of Borobudur.
66. Cf. above, fn. 29.

--- [Page 18] ---
Andrea Acri 30
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014A comparable mixture of Sanskritic “high culture” and “low status” in the context 
of religious performances carried out in both courtly and popular milieux can be 
envisaged in the Javanese setting. In RK 25.21a the vidu is called kaṭak —an Old 
Javanese hapax that may be derived from the Sanskrit kathaka or a related Middle 
Indo-Arian form  kathak  (cf. Acri 2011a:69). In panel VII.11d of Caṇ̣i Śiva at Loro 
Jonggrang (cf. below: 31–32, and ig. 10) we ind an ascetic of Brahmanical or Ṛṣi type 
reading from a palm-leaf manuscript, who is apparently involved in the performance 
scene depicted there. The Sumanasāntaka account of the prasprasan  ceremony 
portrays a “mistress of the Śaiva” lecturing on Sanskrit grammar (130.1); further, in 
Sumanasāntaka  113.11–15—i.e. immediately after the account of the performance 
given by pirus es and vidus on the occasion of Aja and Indumatī’s wedding—Mpu 
Monaguṇa describes an ascetic ( viku) of great penance ( kasutapan ) and his large 
company of disciples ( śiṣya ), whose appearance and behaviour he characterises as 
uncouth ( pǝñcul )67 and clumsy ( kiṭuṅ ), but whose elaborate speech about an Old 
Javanese linguistic dispute was masterful ( baṅsit ). Irrespective of whether or not 
the last description refers to an adherent of the Śaiva Atimārga indeed, the presence 
of such ascetic(s) amongst the large crowds gathered on the occasion of important 
events in the life of royal courts tells us something about their strong appeal to 
both the elites and the rural folk with whom they mingled, as well as their possible 
connection with the performers themselves.
Performing Brahmans, Kraton Buffoons, and Dancing Girls
From Old Javanese epigraphic records and literary texts from the 9th to the late 
14th century, it emerges that the performers known as vidu and pirus  not only had a role 
in the performing arts, but also carried out magico-ritual functions on the occasion of 
festivities held in courtly milieux. These records are, however, dificult to decipher, 
because in their formulation “much that was obvious to contemporaries but which 
remains obscure for those living in a different century is only implied” (Zoetmulder 
1974:208). Besides the extended—albeit still largely obscure—description of the 
performance by vidus, pirus es and dancing girls found in the Sumanasāntaka , we are 
left with few detailed textual accounts portraying these igures and the performances 
they staged. In order to ill the remaining gaps, one may turn to the realm of visual 
arts and ethnography, and pursue the hypothesis that some 19th- and early 20th-century 
Javanese performers may represent the heirs of the enigmatic characters who appear 
on reliefs of Central Javanese monuments from the 8th and 9th centuries AD.  
In a fascinating essay, aptly titled “A thousand years old profession in the princely 
courts on Java,” Stutterheim (1956a:93–94) discussed the mysterious Brahman 
depicted on some reliefs of the Borobudur:
There are always a few women present, probably also dancers, who handle little handbells, and a 
67. Cf. OJED (1343), s.v. pĕñcul : “(one can only guess from the context:) not bothering with the rules 
of etiquette or decorum, unreined, uncouth, rude.”

--- [Page 19] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 31
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014man in Brahman dress frequently appears, apparently marking the time with his hands; occasionally 
he also has little bells in his hands. [Quoted from Krom and van Erp 1920:706] This refers to a 
company which evidently belongs to the dancing-scene, but which does not perform the actual 
dance. The remarkable thing in the passage quoted is the man “in Brahman dress” (ig. 11 [= ig. 7 
in this article]); whether or not he belongs to the highest caste is immaterial. What are we to think 
of this holy man who, judging by his beard or moustaches, should be in a hermitage rather than in 
a dancing scene?
[p. 94] That he is a “brahman” can be deduced mainly from the fact that in most cases he has 
moustaches and a beard  […] judging by his position, posture and other characteristics, he appears 
to take part actively in the course of the dance . He is not completely absorbed in his own action, 
as the musicians of the reliefs usually are, but his movements and actions are clearly intended 
for the dance, while it is being performed by the dancing-girl or -girls. Furthermore, on several 
reliefs he appears to sing or recite ; […] inally he claps his hands  or handles the little hand-bells. 
(Stutterheim’s italics).
Krom and van Erp detected the Brahmanic character on several reliefs of 
Borobudur;68 here I have included a selection of the most striking and/or clear 
depictions (cf. igs. 2–7).69 Similar igures also appear on reliefs of the 9th-century 
Buddhist Caṇ̣i Sari (cf. ig. 9, featuring a solitary dancing Brahman), as well as 
on Śaiva monuments, such as Caṇ̣i Śiva at Loro Jonggrang in Prambanan.70 With 
reference to panel VII.11d of that temple (cf. ig. 10), Stutterheim (1956a:93) noted 
that “a man with moustaches is to be found among the company of musicians, a man 
who evidently has something to do with the dance performed there.” He described 
the scene as follows (1987:152–154):
It is clear that here some sort of celebration is taking place. The dancing girls, the musicians and 
the priests leave no doubt about it. […] The dance of the woman is typically tantrik, as we can 
see in the Buddhist iconography of the Ḍākinī’s and other creatures of the ferocious type. It is a 
dance which can be seen till today as a religious dance in Tibet. Perhaps it would be good, if we 
consider the dance on our relief as belonging to the celebration and not just meant for the pleasure 
of the audience. […] The smaller drums are ḍamaru s, as they are often to be seen even today with 
snake-charmers, but seldom used for ceremonies. But I must, however, point to the non-Indonesian 
character of the ensemble.
[c:] A woman with a sword and a shield is doing a war dance. In front of her, on the loor, is a vessel 
full of lowers and next to her again lowers and a fruit. On the other side there is a woman seated, 
68. Another interesting dancing male igure who, although cannot be identiied as strictly “Brahmanic” 
as he lacks beard and sacred cord (although he seemingly does have a moustache), evidently represents 
an ascetic—with a somewhat wild, uncanny look—is the one carved on panel O 39 of Borobudur 
(cf. ig. 8). That the dancing male in question is an ascetic may be evinced by the object found next to 
him, which was identiied by Kunst as a “begging bowl with tinkling bars” (1968, ig. 5) or “begging-
cup with small tinkling rods” (1973 II:416).
69. Although a discussion of the narrative context of the performances might help us better understand 
the circumstances that were the occasion of the performances, this is not the right place to embark 
on an identiication of the narratives, which I will reserve for another occasion; my aim is simply to 
individuate a typology of characters/performers, which are in fact also found on other Central Javanese 
monuments, in different contexts.
70. Even a partial reproduction of relevant panels and a cursory description of them would take too 
much space. For a survey of the relevant panels, cf. Sedyawati 1982. 

--- [Page 20] ---
Andrea Acri 32
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014similarly decorated as the dancer, holding in her right-hand a bell and a bow in her left. Between 
both women there is a diadem (?).
[d:] A group of persons playing music. In the foreground there is a man with a moustache, who is 
reciting from a manuscript and another who is playing with the hand on two drums. Behind there 
are two women with hand-drums and two more where, however, it is not possible to determine what 
they are doing in the concert. On [panel VII.]12e there is a sitting musician, with a bell or ḍamaru . 
The subject of the scene and its position in the Rāmāyaṇa narrative are still not 
settled (for a summary of the previous interpretations, cf. Worsley 2006:231–232). 
Worsley suggests that the panel should be interpreted neither as Bharata’s nor as 
Rāma’s royal consecration ( abhiṣeka ), but as a depiction of the festivities held on 
the occasion of the return of Rāma and Sītā in Ayodhyā. Performances staged by 
antinomian religious performers could have played a role in both types of events—
compare, for instance, those described in the Sumanasāntaka  passage discussed 
above; however, given the prominence of the two Yoginīs71 and the concomitant 
presence of various characters with either demonic or “Brahmanical”/ascetic 
features, it is tempting to interpret this relief as portraying a gaṇacakra -like ritual, 
which was often associated with royal ceremonies, and especially consecrations, 
across the Early Medieval Indic world.72 
The Brahman appearing in the dancing scenes discussed by Stutterheim calls to 
mind the “master” ( svāmī ), “leader” ( nāyaka ), or “stage director” ( sūtradhāra ) known 
in classical Indian theatre and dance. This igure, who was the actual “proprietor” 
of troups, took part in the performances as lead singer and keeper of the rhythm 
for the dancers. The latter activity may have been represented in the Borobudur 
reliefs, where the “Brahman” appears to be either playing cymbals or clapping his 
hands. Nonetheless, the ascetic attire—including beard and moustache, twisted locks 
of hairs, and Brahmanical thread—displayed by the igure portrayed on the reliefs 
indicates that he may have fulilled both functions, i.e. that of master of the troupe/
dancing girls and religious practitioner. 
Stutterheim attempted to explain this enigmatic character by making a thousand-
year-long leap to the late 19th-early 20th century courts of Surakarta and Yogyakarta. 
Suggesting that “in all probability we have before us the holders of that same function 
which existed at the courts of the Hindu-Javanese rulers more than a thousand years ago 
and which is perhaps still older,” Stutterheim (1956a:94) linked the character portrayed 
on the Central Javanese reliefs to the bearded performers documented in accounts by 
Javanese and Dutch witnesses. One such account, given by Stutterheim’s Javanese 
informants in 1932, describes two canthang balung s (Jav.) , i.e. antinomian dancers 
performing at the kraton  of Surakarta on occasion of the Muslim festival of Garebeg:
71. The Yoginī performing a “war dance” has a striking, in fact virtually identical, parallel in a igure 
embossed on a gold plate found in the site of Si Thep in modern Thailand (cf. Miettinen 2008:74).
72. The Deśavarṇana  (43.3) mentions a gaṇacakra  “always going together with gifts, beloved of his 
subjects” in association with king Kṛtanagara of Siṅhasāri (r. 1268–1292), an adherent of esoteric 
Buddhist cults. 

--- [Page 21] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 33
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014For the so-called gajah ngombé  (“the drinking elephant”) the dance postures jèngkèng  and kalang 
kinaṇṭang  are used, with the right and left hand stretched out and with their bodies slightly bent 
forward and hopping like birds  the dancers hold a small glass of gin in their right hands. In their 
left hands they hold between their ingers four chaṇṭang balung , called collectively a kĕpyak  and 
made of four long, lat leaf-shaped bones, strung on a string and kept apart by knots; they are held 
between the ingers and make a rhythmical, rattling noise. The dancers make twittering sounds  
while at every gong-beat they drink the gin, which is replenished from a jug on the loor, for the 
dance is performed in a crouching position. At the same time the dancers shake their heads in a 
ridiculous manner . […] the dancers are called baḍut  or also kriḍastama . […] A special task is 
reserved for the dancers at the grĕbĕg mulud . […] During the whole procession they perform a 
dance, the tayungan , in which they go along  hopping, alternating their right and left foot at every 
gong-beat. (Stutterheim 1956a:95–96; my italics).
Stutterheim (1956a:94) also notes that these chararacters clap their hands 
rhythmically during the dance of the female dancers called serimpis , and shout to 
them the measures at certain intervals indicated by the gamelan, while praising them. 
These actions—which, as I have pointed out above, seem to pertain to the igure 
of the “leader of the troupe”—comply with all the characteristics displayed by the 
Brahman-like igures in the Central Javanese reliefs, who also feature a similar attire 
(i.e. the long beard and the naked upper part of the body). The striking similarities 
between the dances performed by the canthang balung s and those described in both 
the RK and Sumanasāntaka  give us good reason to pursue Stutterheim’s hypothesis 
further. For instance, the canthang balung s’ “twittering sounds” call to mind the shrill 
of a bird, and may be compared to the cry of the peacock in RK 24.106 ( tavvaṅnya  
sugәma ) and the high-pitched shrill by a female performer in Sumanasāntaka  
130.2b. Their shaking of the head in a ridiculous manner , the indication that their 
right and left hands stretched out with their bodies bent forward and hopping like 
birds,  and their going along hopping , alternating their right and left foot  call to 
mind the characterization of the pirus  as a pigeon in the RK,73 and the verb akikat  in 
Sumanasāntaka  130.2a, which may qualify both a dancer and a peacock (apparently 
referring to a dancing posture). The canthang balung s’ dance performed in a 
crouching position, which has a comic effect (enhanced by the fact that drinking of 
alcohol is also taking place), is in harmony with the actions conveyed through the 
verbal form mamaṇḍak  and the noun (or adjective) vәlu in respectively RK 24.106d 
and Sumanasāntaka  113.5.74  These actions may be compared to the most popular 
dance posture, with one leg uplifted and both legs strongly bent, characterizing the 
representations of either male or female dancers in Southeast Asian temple sculpture 
since the 8th century AD, such as the one portrayed on relief VII.11d of Caṇ̣i Śiva at 
Loro Jonggrang. When describing the posture of the dancing Yoginīs—“possessed”  
73. Intriguingly, the Proto-Austronesian * balug  “pigeon” (Wolff 2010:753–754), attested in a number 
of Austronesian languages as, e.g., baloz, balog, balu , is remindful of the Old and Mod. Jav. baluṅ /
balung  (“bone”) in the name canthang balung .
74. Another intriguing linguistic convergence may be found in the Proto-Austronesian luŋ, “curved,” 
and Mod. Jav. mε-lung “bend, be bowed” (Wolff 2010:899); cf. above, fn. 26.

--- [Page 22] ---
Andrea Acri 34
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014female Tantric initiates in a state of supernatural prowess—who are often, yet 
inaccurately, referred to as apsaras  in Khmer art (cf. Sharrock 2013), Miettinen 
(2008:107) remarks:
both the supporting and the raised leg are strongly bent often resulting in an exceptionally low 
position. Most of the dancing “apsaras” convey an impression of dynamic movement, since keeping 
the balance in this position for a longer time seems nearly impossible.
Sharrock (2013:122), referring to the work of Louis Frédéric, describes this 
position— ardhaparyaṅkāsana , which is also the iconographic posture of Hevajra, 
a ierce deity of Tantric Buddhism—“more like ‘ierce trampling’ than dancing.” 
Dunn (1983:141) describes a martial and demonic character of the sacred Balinese 
masked-dance topeng pajegan  (of which Sidha Karya is also part, as we will see 
below) as performing a dance characterized by a walk “performed with lexed knees, 
varying degrees of turned out feet, and an open position of the legs in relationship to 
the pelvis.” This walk, called malpal , 
has a large stride where the center of gravity moves from side to side in large movements resembling 
a swagger […]; the turned put foot is raised so that the heel is almost at knee level […]. The center 
of gravity is low due to the lexion of the knees, and there is a pulsating quality to the phrases of 
the movement. The height of the stride and the lowness of the center of gravity may be adjusted 
to create different effects depending on which mask is worn for this role. A iercer mask would be 
danced with a lower center of gravity for the walk and a more accented gait, with high knees and 
a heavy step. A high stride is also used in demonic roles and is associated with a wild animal-like 
ierceness. (Dunn 1983:142)
According to Dunn (1983:145), the design patterns of several masks in the topeng 
pajegan  “are of a large asymmetrical angular presence projecting his energy from 
side to side in oppositional movement through space.” This style is associated to the 
demonic creature portrayed on frontons or lintels of Śaiva and Buddhist temples, the 
Kīrttimukha (“face of glory”) or Kālamukha (“Kāla’s face”),75 insofar as the position 
of the arms of the dancer resembles that displayed by the architectural motif:
His upper arms are held at slightly above shoulder level and his arms extend forward from right 
angles at the elbows to lexed wrists.
In the Balinese repertoire described by Dunn (1983:198), the tayungan —the 
dance style performed by the canthang balung s (Stutterheim 1956a:96)—involves
the swaying of the hands and arms accompanying the walk with the impulse originating at the rising 
elbow and twisting wrist as if pushing out to each side emphasing [sic] the oppositional dynamic 
of the walk.76
75. This mythological demonic character, and the related architectural element, is known in Bali as 
Bhoma or Bhuta and in Java as Banaspati or Bhaṭāra Kāla (cf. Emigh 1984:23), and often referred to by 
art historians and archaeologists as Kāla-Makara. Cf. below: 51 .
76. Brakel-Papenhuizen (1995:36) describes the tayungan  performed by war dancers at the courts 
of Surakarta and Yogyakarta as a “stylized forward stepping […] which is performed in time to the 

--- [Page 23] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 35
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Compare igs. 11 and 13, portraying two canthang balung s in the gajah ngombé  
posture, and ig. 1 (the mayūralalita karaṇa ), as well as the position of the arms 
displayed by the “dancing girls” in the Borobudur reliefs, igs. 2 and 3. Also 
interesting is the detail that the naked body of the canthang balung s was daubed over 
with yellow boreh  unguent, which is in harmony with the image of jәnu (= boreh ) 
unguent pouring down on excited dancing peacocks in RK 24.105.
In an attempt to identify the Indo-Javanese prototypes of the canthang balung s 
and their subordinate dancing girls, Stutterheim (1956a:98–99) quoted a passage 
from Moens (1924:531, note 33), who saw in the canthang balung s the heirs to 
antinomian Tantric practitioners who lourished in the Vajrayāna Buddhist milieu of 
the East Javanese Siṅhasāri kingdom (12–13th century):
In the Kraton of Surakarta, a remarkable survival of “Those who enjoy the ive M’s”77 is still found 
in the so-called chaṇṭang balung , two bearded “buffoons” with the upper part of their body naked 
and with yellow stripes, whose duty is to become fuddled in public with gin or arak and to dance in 
an intoxicated state. These court-functionaries not so very long ago received their oficial income 
by keeping dancing girls and prostitutes. Their name, probably a nick-name, is probably due to the 
fact that originally they performed their “dance” on the kṣetra , “rattling with bones” ( nyaṇṭang 
balung ).
Stutterheim (1956a:99) linked the canthang balung s to a Tantric milieu 
insofar as they made use of mudrā s (mystical hand gestures) during their dance, 
and originally had seals of ofice consisting of a phallus inside a heart-shaped 
vulva.78 According to Stutterheim, other possibly Tantric elements of their attire 
include the poleng  pattern of their wrangka s,79 as well as their weaponry ( kris, and 
sometimes pikes); further, he (1956a:99) argued that the canthang balung s’ other 
(nick-)name, i.e. kriḍa astama ,80 betrays
a trace of the Sanskrit root of the word “laugh(ing)” has [astama  = (h)as + tama ] … in Yogyakarta 
the attention is emphatically drawn to the jeering laughter of the two lurah s; jeering laughter also 
plays a role in tantric rites.
basic pulse of the accompanying gamelan music. While such stylized walking apparently derives from 
ceremonial striding in processions […] it is also used in classical dance to move across the dancing area.”
77. Stutterheim (quoting Moens) is referring to the practitioners of “left-hand Tantrism,” who allegedly 
enjoyed four impure substances ( madya  or wine, māṃsa  or meat, matsya  or ish, mudrā or parched 
grain) and sexual intercourse ( maithuna ) as part of their religious and ritual regimen. 
78. As Stutterheim (1956a:96) informs us, these seals of ofice were destroyed at the death of their 
possessors; regrettably, these insignia were no longer used by the early 20th century, so what we know 
about them was reported by “those who still remember them.” Stutterheim (1926) notes that heart-
shaped “chastity plates” or pubic plaques were worn by ascetics or other religious igures in East 
Javanese Hindu art. Many such pubic plaques are reproduced and discussed in Lunsingh-Scheurleer 
2011; some of these display a phallus and are associated with ascetic igures of the Ṛṣi Brahmanical 
type ( ibid. ig. 1), or with the character of Bhīma ( ibid. ig. 3).
79. Indeed a chequered loincloth ( poleng ) is a typical feature of the iconography of Bhīma (i.e. Bhairava) 
in East Java and Bali (Stutterheim 1956b:108, 112–114, 118, 122). Cf. also below, fn. 88.
80. As reported by Stutterheim (1956a:96), the personal names of the two canthang balung s with the 
title of jajar  (the lowest rank among the court administrative oficials) were respectively Suka Astama 
(suka = pleasure) and Guṇa Astama ( guṇa  = magical power).

--- [Page 24] ---
Andrea Acri 36
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014To this I may add that krīḍa  in Sanskrit means “sport, play, pastime, amusement, 
amorous sport,” “disrespect shown by jest or joke” ( krīḍ = “jest, joke”), and is a term 
commonly associated with dance and theatre in the Sanskrit tradition. The “dancing 
girls” doubling as prostitutes mentioned by Moens are the pesindhèn talèdhèk 
(Jav.).81 When discussing the pesindhèn talèdhèk , Stutterheim (1956a:98) quotes a 
description related by a Javanese informant to Groneman in the 1930s:
A few pĕsiṇḍèn talèḍèk —the public dancing girls attached to the kraton , who sing at other 
gamelan-performances or who with their steps and solo-singing add lustre to the nayuban  or dance-
performances of the men—follow their oficial “master.”
Stutterheim (p. 100) concluded that these features must be ascribed to Tantric 
rites which seemed to him “to be in the irst place a recrudescence of old indigenous 
shamanistic and other customs,” while the dancing-girls reminded him of the 
devadāsī s, the dancing girls-cum-sacred prostitutes known from the Indian tradition:
The older phase of the profession of the talèḍèk  undoubtedly brings to mind the devadāsī s, the 
so-called nautch-girls of the Indian temples; the presence of a brahman on the Barabụur-relief 
permits us to draw this line of development via the chaṇṭang balung .
In the footnote closing his article, Stutterheim referred “for comparison” to a 
series of articles by Brandts Buys, which also dealt with the canthang balung s. 
Brandts Buys (1933:259), who presented materials that were indeed largely 
identical with Stutterheim’s, regarded these characters as “degenerate Brahmans” 
(gedegenereerde Brahmanen ), and accepted Moens’ hypothesis linking the canthang 
balung s to Tantric Śaiva-Buddhist worshipers of Bhairava. He (p. 260) further added 
the interesting—but to him “admittedly odd” ( wel vreemd )—piece of information 
that the canthang balung s performed at wedding ceremonies and the festivities 
connected with them, both within and without the kraton . 
The textual and visual materials discussed by Stutterheim were again considered 
by Holt (1967:113–115), who advanced an alternative hypothesis:
All these Javanese functionaries—the Brahmans on the reliefs, the buyut  in literature, the supervisors 
at the courts—may hark back to the buffoon ( vidûshaka ) of the classical Indian theater who was ‘‘a 
Brahman but ugly and ridiculous.’’
Holt connected the Javanese pesindhèn talèdhèk , and especially the female dancer 
called juru i aṅin  described in the Deśavarṇana  (cf. below: 40), to fertility cults and 
indigenous female deities. In my opinion, Holt’s view represents a step backwards 
from Stutterheim’s more speciic identiications; nevertheless, Stutterheim’s enticing 
hypothesis needs to be updated in the light of recent advancements in our knowledge  
 
 
81. Sutton (1984:123) points out that the word talèdhèk shares one root with nglelèdhèk  “to tempt, 
lure, attract.”

--- [Page 25] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 37
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014of Indic religions. An attempt in this direction, which goes beyond the catchwords 
“Tantric,” “indigenous,” and “shamanistic,” was made by Becker (2004:176–177):
In addition to the irm textual evidence of their presence in Java, there is less-irm, but suggestive, 
evidence of the involvement of Pāśupata monks in performance traditions. The reliefs of a Śaivite 
priest dancing and singing or reciting in the company of dancing women on temple reliefs at 
Borobudur and Prambanan (Stutterheim 1956:93) may indicate Pāśupata monks in the “marked” 
or irst stage of spiritual practice. The women could also be Pāśupata. In India, women as well 
as persons from all castes could receive Pāśupata initiation, a practice that scandalized orthodox 
brahmāns [sic] in India. 
When discussing the canthang balung s, Becker (2004:178) remarked:
Strange and inappropriate behavior by palace oficials would not in itself identify these men as 
remnants of a Pāśupata monkhood, but they formerly carried as well a Śaivite seal of ofice. Their 
oficial seal was a representation of a lingga-yoni , the oldest and most widespread of Śaivite symbols.
Becker (2004:177–178) rightly noted a similarity between those Javanese igures 
and the Pāśupata practitioners in the domain of performance traditions, and were 
connected by her to Pāśupata adepts in the second stage, who adopted a peripatetic 
lifestyle including the display of “madness” or improper/ridiculous actions aimed 
at triggering the contempt of lay people. However, on account of the markedly 
antinomian features displayed by these dancers, it is more likely that they represented 
the remnants of even more extreme Śaiva groups. In fact it has now become clear 
that the Pāśupatas were just one among several Śaiva (sub)groups connected with 
performance and antinomian behaviours, such as the Lākulas, Kārukas, Kālamukhas, 
and Kāpālikas. It is especially the individuals (or groups) that mainstream Sanskrit 
sources collectively call “Kāpālikas,”82 but who were also known under the general 
label of Siddhas. Those practitioners were scornfully depicted as supernaturally 
endowed, yet evil, sorcerers who often posed as false Brahmans or ascetics; they 
sang, danced and played in theatrical performances; they encouraged the practice of 
drinking alcohol and engaging in sex with female attendants, whom they admitted 
into their order (cf. Bloomield 1924); and their attire included ornaments and 
musical instruments made of (allegedly human) bones, as well as human skulls or 
parts thereof. The etymology of the (nick-)name canthang balung s would perfectly 
make sense in a Kāpālika milieu, for the “rattling bones” may be nothing else than 
a local variant of the rattle-drums ( ḍamaru )83 made of bones that constituted one of 
82. Given the paucity of textual data, mostly consisting in second-hand accounts, it is dificult to envisage 
a neat 1:1 correspondence between actual groups of practitioners and the labels that were attributed to 
them by the sources. However, by upholding a polythetic categorization, and by recognizing that the 
motif of the Kāpālika (or Siddha) ascetic constituted a popular, and virtually proverbial, element of the 
Indic imaginaire  as attested in both literature and the visual arts (Bloomield 1924 and Samuel 2006), 
I believe that this remains a helpful category to use for the purpose of the present study. Compare 
Hatley’s (2013) polythetic approach to the classiication of the religious phenomenon of Yoginī-cults, 
and the typology of Yoginī practitioners, in medieval India.
83. A waisted ḍamaru —“probably manufactured from a couple of human skulls” (Kunst 1973 I:219) is 

--- [Page 26] ---
Andrea Acri 38
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014the most characteristic marks of the Śaiva Kāpālikas. Also indicative of a Kāpālika 
origin may be the strings of lowers adorning their naked bodies, which is reminiscent 
of the garland of lowers offered to the gods ( nirmālya ) worn by Atimārga ascetics, 
and the emphasis on laughter, which is reminiscent of the observance of aṭṭahāsa  
or vehement laughter prescribed by the Pāśupata observance ( pāśupatavrata ). The 
detail, reported by Stutterheim (1956a:97), that on certain occasions the naked body 
of the canthang balung s was daubed over with horizontal stripes of yellow boreh  
unguent is in harmony with the image of jәnu (= boreh ) unguent pouring down on 
excited dancing peacocks (and, arguably, pigeons) in RK 24.105, and also resonates 
with the practice of smearing a yellow orpiment over the body or hairs and beard 
associated in certain Sanskrit texts with pracitioners of the Bhairavamārga.84 As a 
matter of fact, the four photographic depictions of the canthang balung s “in action” 
included in Brandts Buys’ article, which are reproduced here as igs. 12 and 13, are 
impressive insofar as the characters they portray are strongly reminiscent of scruffy, 
emaciated, nirmālya -wearing Indic ascetics of the Pāśupata and Kāpālika type. Their 
unusually tall kuluk  cap (fez) is reminiscent of the mitre worn by Balinese Śaiva 
oficiants of both pedanda  (ig. 14) and bhujāṅga /seṅguhu  status, as well as other 
categories of Indic ascetics.85 Intriguingly, a similar cap is worn by Keralite artist 
Mani Damodara Chakyar playing the part of a Kāpālika in a Kutiyattam staging the 
Sanskrit Mattavilāsa  (ig. 15); the artist also sports a prominent faux beard and wears 
strings of lowers. Further, as pointed out by Stutterheim (1956a:96), the canthang 
balung s performing on the occasion of the Muslim ceremony of  Garebeg enacted a 
held by the famous 13th-century dancing-Bhairava statue found near Caṇ̣i Singhasari (cf. also Kunst 
1968:36); see also panel VII.11 cd of Caṇ̣i Śiva in Prambanan (cf. above, and ig. 10), and Borobudur 
relief IV .7, showing a brahmanic character playing what seems to be a waisted (larger than usual) 
ḍamaru  (Kunst 1968:35, and igs. 31–32; 1973 II:417). 
84. See, e.g., Harṣacarita  3.121 (ed. Kane 1918:50), which describes a Bhairavācārya and his 
disciples on the occasion of a macabre ritual performed in a charnel ground as follows: “Jewelled 
rings dangling from the other ear anointed them with sparkling lustre like a spell-charmed gorocana  
pigment” ( itarakarṇāvalambināṃ ratnakuṇḍalānām acchayā rucā gorocanayeva mantraparijaptayā 
samālabdhāṅgāḥ ). The Buddhist Kṛṣṇayamāritantra  speaks of an unspeciied yellow substance 
(piṅgala ) smeared over the beard and hairs of a Siddha; Davidson (2002:380) takes this to be gorocanā  
(yellow orpiment) on account of the Harṣacarita  passage. White (1997:87) discusses a connection 
between the four alchemical “primal Siddhas” and four alchemical substances, one of which is 
gorocanā  (“in fact an organic dye having the same intense yellow color as orpiment. Gorocanā  is made 
from the urine of the cow,” ibid.:91 n. 3). A connection between a Bhairavika milieu and boreh  unguent 
in Java is suggested by a report by Knebel on a stone statue of Bhīma from East Java, where the author 
comments: “On the igure we found boreh—sapienti  sat. The place is indeed pakahulan  [= place where 
vows, kahul , are made], in case of disease of man, beast or crop” (quoted in Stutterheim 1956b:112).
85. The kuluk  (also called makutha , from the Skt makuṭa [= mukuṭa ], “crest”) is a Javanese headdress 
worn by court oficials. In ig. 11, various igures in the background (including the musicians) are 
wearing kuluk s; however, those worn by the canthang balung s appear to be of a different, i.e. much 
taller, type. Compare the cap/mitre worn by ascetics in late Campā art (e.g. a 15th century sculpture 
from Phật Lồi Pagoda on Nhơn Hải peninsula [B ình Định, Vietnam],  depicting a Śaiva ascetic 
[śivācārya ] identiied as such by inscription on the back: isaw.nyu.edu/publications/inscriptions/
campa/inscriptions/C0214.html; accessed 23-01-2014). I thank Arlo Grifiths for drawing my 
attention to this image.

--- [Page 27] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 39
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014caper so as to imitate dogs in heat:
Formerly, some thirty years ago, they had to perform a remarkable dance when arrived at the foot of 
the stinggil  [the building where the gamelan are kept], which is described as being an imitation of 
dogs at mating time. If they managed to make the susuhunan  laugh, they were assured of a monetary 
reward. This custom was abolished probably for the sake of decency because many Europeans […] 
were present at the grĕbĕg  ceremony.
This dance reminds us of the imitation of mating goats by pirus es in the 
Sumanasāntaka . The imitation of animals, and especially of a bull’s lowing, was a 
practice of the Pāśupatas, and of the pāśupatavrata  in general (cf. Ingalls 1962:295). 
Since dogs are considered as the most impure animals in Brahmanical lore, they 
were often connected to the practices of antinomian groups: for example, the 
“great observance” ( mahāvrata ) carried our by the Kāpālikas prescribed that the 
adept must wear the skin of a dog; the Abhidharmakośabhāṣya  by the Buddhist 
master Vasubandhu characterizes the Pāśupata conduct as “behaving like a dog” 
(kukkura […]vrataṃ ).86
Becker’s identiication of the women as Pāśupatas, and in particular her last remark 
about the women’s admissibility into the order, is not very likely. As it appears from 
their surviving scriptures, the Pāśupata order—at least in its original form—was only 
accessible to male consecrated Brahmins (Sanderson 1988:664). To her credit, Becker 
(2004:196) in an endnote suggests the alternative hypothesis that the female igures 
might have been the equivalent of the Indian devadāsī s (as argued by Stutterheim, 
1956a:100). Sutton (1984:125) too pointed out that the talèdhèk , much like the 
devadāsī s, doubled as prostitutes. From epigraphic documents we know that devadāsī s 
were maintained by the Kālamukhas, a group of the Śaiva Atimārga related to the 
Kāpālikas (Lorenzen 1991); post-twelfth century South Indian Saiddhāntika sources 
document a group of female servants maintained for temple dancing and singing, 
called gaṇikā  or rudragaṇikā  (Brunner, Oberhammer and Padoux 2004:175–176). 
The female talèdhèk , who were under the responsibility of the canthang balung s 
in Surakarta, and of the lurah talèdhèk  in Yogyakarta, would also it well into the 
category of female attendants ( dūtī) of the Kapālinī or Yoginī type, who ranked among 
the antinomian groups of the Kāpālikas, Kālamukhas, and Siddhas. 
Sutton (1984) elaborated on the Javanese tradition of the talèdhèk  and its 
connection with that of the canthang balung s in a study combining the early 
reports discussed by Brandts Buys, Stutterheim, and Pigeaud, with data drawn from 
Javanese texts and anthropological research conducted in modern Java. In her words 
(1984:123–124),
86. Cf. White (1991:102–103) and Acharya (2013:105, 127–128). A black dog is connected with 
Bhairava, the demonic manifestation of Śiva worshiped by the Kāpālikas, of whom he may be a 
manifestation as well as a vehicle ( vāhana ); a dog features in this function in the dancing-Bhairava 
statue of Siṅhasāri. We also know of a Tantric master named Kukkurācārya ( kukkura  = dog), who 
instructs king Indrabhūti in obtaining the supernatural status of vidyādhara  (Davidson 2002:243). 

--- [Page 28] ---
Andrea Acri 40
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Though rare today in Central Java, one still inds an occasional itinerant taledhek  with a few 
musicians, to my knowledge always male, wandering the streets of even the larger cities. […] They 
are usually looked down upon by the general populace as beggars, and the taledhek  as prostitutes. 
[…] Whether as a beggar or as a participant in a ritual, the singer dancer is expected to perform in 
a manner alluring to men.
Sutton (1984:125) translates a passage from Pigeaud’s Javaanse Volksvertoningen , 
where it appears that in Solo the  talèdhèk were under the jurisdiction of the canthang 
balung s:
[…] it is said that they [the canthang balung s] formerly held the position of leaders of the dance 
women. […] According to my information from Solo, they had the rights simply to consider as 
their own subordinates women or girls who caused public scandal through immoral conduct and 
who were not married or subordinate to a master or lord. Whenever a man appeared who wanted to 
marry one of these women or take her as a servant, he had to buy her freedom.
Sutton (1984:121–123) traced this modern Javanese tradition of dancing girls to 
premodern East Java by drawing attention to a passage of the 14th-century kakavin  
Deśavarṇana by Mpu Prapañca, where a  number of parallels with the talèdhèk  and 
the context of the performance occur. Canto 91 of the Old Javanese poem describes a 
“female entertainer” named juru i aṅin  (“Mistress of the Wind”), whose performance 
consists of both dance and singing: 
“The irst part was essentially comical (witty, cucud ) and perhaps erotic. The female dancer was 
accompanied by Buyut (Great grandfather, and oldman), probably a follower and astute servant 
(panakawan ) of the kind that is indispensable in Javanese plays” [Pigeaud 1960–63, vol. IV:316]. 
This part was performed “in the open air, probably near the countrymen’s hall” [ id., vol. IV:317]. The 
second part began with her entrance into the royal ‘Presence’, where she joined the exalted members 
of the court in drinking liquor and where “Mantris (mandarins) and upapatti s (assessors at law) 
equally are taken for companion by her, drinking liquor, singing kidung s (songs)” [ id., vol. III:108]. 
Mpu Prapañca deines these songs as being “comparable with the cries of 
a peacock on a branch in their poetic beauty” (canto 91.3b, mrak mañavuvvaṅ i 
padapa tulya nika riṅ alaṅ , trans. Robson 1995:191), which suggests a link between 
the female dancer and a peacock. Furthermore, Sutton (1984:125) noted that men 
made gifts of clothing to juru i aṅin , which inds a parallel in the Modern tayuban /
nayuban  tradition. As remarked by Pigeaud (1960–63, IV:316):
In modern Java in rural districts the custom for men to throw articles of their own apparel […] on 
the loor at the feet of a female dancer as a token of admiration and erotic excitement still prevails.
This custom reminds us of the simile found in RK 24.105–106, where excited 
peacocks danced under a “shower” of “golden ornaments” falling from trees. 
The Deśavarṇana ’s account has common elements also with the description of 
female performers ( strī niṅ śaiva and strī niṅ vidu ) in Sumanasāntaka  130.1–3, 
who simultaneously dance, sing and recite in a comical manner. The name of the 
Deśavarṇana ’s performer—“Mistress of the Wind”—may be linked to a Tantric 

--- [Page 29] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 41
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014milieu, for the god Vāyu87 was characterized in many Old Javanese (as well as Sanskrit) 
sources as the father of Bhīma, whose connection with Bhairava, the demonic aspect 
of Śiva, was convincingly argued by Stutterheim (1956b:124–125; cf. below).88 The 
active participation of court dignitaries in the dance and accompanying “drinking 
bout” appears to be a common feature in the Old Javanese accounts I have presented 
above. Also interesting is the presence of the buyut  or “old man,” whose role of 
buffoon, master or partner of dancing-girls, and magician,89 at once recalls that of the 
pirus  and canthang balung . 
Sutton (1984:121) discussed the practices found in passages of the 18th–19th century 
Javanese Serat Centhini , which persists in the Javanese tayuban  tradition of dance-
performance, where one or more talèdhèk  are involved in a kind of erotic singing and 
dancing with men and women, accompanied by gamelan music:
Tayuban  need not involve drinking or physical contact between the taledhek  and any of her male 
partners, yet in many cases it involves a considerable degree of both. The well-known nineteenth 
century poem, Serat Centhini , describes at great length a tayuban  in which most of the participants 
wind up intoxicated and some copulate on the dance loor. While many Javanese today claim that 
Serat Centhini  descriptions such as this are fanciful exaggerations, drinking and sexual license have 
been common practice at tayuban  occasions. [Stutterheim 1956a:99:] “It is […] an astonishing 
spectacle for those who have the opportunity to attend a real, old-fashioned nayuban  for the irst 
time, to see the stately Javanese, who in ordinary life do not in the least appear to appreciate the use 
of alcohol, becoming fuddled to such an extent and to see them in a state of excitement in which 
they occasionally openly misbehave and allow themselves all kinds of liberties with the taledek .”
According to Sumarsam (1995:33), who quotes several passages of the Serat 
87. The Sanskrit/Old Javanese vāyu (“wind,” or “the God Vāyu”) is synonymous with the Old Javanese aṅin.
88. The Sanskrit word vātula  (“windy”) denotes a “mad” or “crazy” person, and is also used for someone 
who is possessed. According to a widespread tradition, Bhīma’s brother is Hanumān, who shares with 
him the appellative bāyuputra (“son of Wind”), and who is himself considered a manifestation of 
Bhairava in both South Asia and the Javano-Balinese world. In the Balinese Kapiparwa  indeed it is 
Hanumān ( anoman ) who eats the Sun instead of his brother Kāla-Bhairava, as another popular version 
of the story has it. Vickers (2011:127) notes that “The link to Bayu explains a connection Balinese 
make between Anoman and Bima, which is otherwise mysterious. […] Anoman and Bima have similar 
iconography: both have the “prawn claw” ( supit urang ) coiffure of the semi-divine heroes of the epics, 
and both wear very little clothing except for the chequered ( poleng ) loin cloth. In Balinese ritual use 
these poleng cloths, as the union of opposites, represent power ( sakti ). The heroes’ conlict is ended by 
the intercession of their father, the god Bayu, who is iconographically identical to Bima, except that he 
has the aureole and what Forge refers to as a ‘god spot’.”
89. A characterization of buyut  as a man of supernatural prowess is found in the Middle Javanese 
chronicle Pararaton  (6.27, quoted in OJED 370). There a buyut  is introduced by the honoriic hyaṅ , 
which is usually reserved for either divinities or characters of a high religious standing (including 
craftsmen). This buyut , who is described as the guru of Ken Aṅrok, possessed various supernatural 
powers, including the dharmakāñcanasidi  (supernatural ability of making gold?). The igures of Buyut 
Cili and Buyut Cungking are revered as persons of (benign) magical power, in connection with slametan  
rituals and barong  performances, in some East Javanese locales (Beatty 1999:86). As in the Pararaton , 
the buyut  is usually referred to as eyang  (hyaṅ ) (id. 1999:99). A connection between buffoonery and 
supernatural/magical power is found in the character embodying a comedian and black magician known 
as bondres  in sacred Balinese temple-dance and performance.

--- [Page 30] ---
Andrea Acri 42
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Centhini and other nearly contemporary Javanese texts, tayuban  continued to be an 
essential part of court celebrations into the 19th century, and survived until recent 
years as a tradition especially followed in wedding celebrations. Even so, as narrated 
in the Babad Mangkubumi , it was perceived with hostility by the devout Muslim 
Paku Buwana IV when he was still a crown prince in the Surakarta court in the 
second half of the 18th century, apparently on account of its wild, un-Islamic character 
(Sumarsam 1995:31–33). Stutterheim indeed labelled the nayuban  a “taṇḍak -party,” 
and connected it to the canthang balung s via the talèdhèk . Sutton (1984:122–123) 
further elaborated upon this connection, linking the canthang balung to the  buyut 
and tandhak (Jav.), whose existence was documented among the modern Tengger 
Hindu communities:
In the Tengger area of East Java, singer-dancers (there called tandhak ) often appear at festive 
occasions where great quantities of liquor are consumed. In their inebriated state, the men behave 
in a manner which would be unacceptable in more normal public encounters with members of the 
opposite sex. The role of the Buyut is also paralleled in the taledhek  tradition. Pigeaud, Stutterheim, 
and Brandts-Buys have written of the canthang balung —men who dressed strangely and danced 
for the ruler ( susuhunan ) of Surakarta and his entourage. [Pigeaud 1938:59:] “They had a place 
amidst the gamelan players whenever bedhaya  or srimpi  dances [female-style ensemble dances of 
the court] were performed in the kraton . Then they fulilled the role of badhud  (jesters) and let the 
senggak  calls [short vocal interjections] be heard against the gamelan music.”
Erotic bedhaya -dances performed at the kraton  of Surakarta in an atmosphere of 
drinking parties among the noblemen is reported by van Goens, a mid-17th century 
Dutch observer (cf. Sumarsam 1995:21). Sumarsam notes that the instrumental 
combination mentioned in the account—i.e. small gongs, lutes, and a bowed-string 
instrument—has no equivalent in today’s Javanese ensembles, yet is mentioned in 
Old Javanese literature, and therefore “might well be a survival of Hindu-Javanese 
ensembles.” The Tenggerese tandhak  singer-dancers obviously derive their name 
from the Old Javanese taṇḍak , which means “dance (with song)” (OJED 1929). 
Given that taṇḍak  is not traceable to any known root in Proto-Austronesian and 
other Austronesian languages, it is tempting to regard this word as deriving from 
the Sanskrit taṇḍaka , “juggler” (MW 432), which itself stems from the root taṇḍ, 
“to beat”; from the same root is derived the word taṇḍu , the “name of an attendant 
of Śiva (Bharata’s teacher in the art of dancing), cf. tāṇḍava : ‘dancing (esp. with 
violent gesticulation), frantic dance (of Śiva and his votaries)’.”90 
Topeng Sidha Karya: A Balinese Tantric Temple-Dancer 
Let us now turn to Bali, where some of the ceremonies and temple-ritual 
performances that are still practiced today may ind their historical predecessors 
90. A connection with Śiva may be suggested on the basis of MW’s gloss of taṇḍi , “a ṛṣi (who saw and 
praised Śiva),” and tāṇḍa  (= tāṇḍaka ), “an old sage.” The dancing posture displayed by the characters 
appearing in this and related reliefs of Caṇ̣i Śiva was identiied by Lopez y Royo-Iyer (1998:66–72) 
as a form of tāṇḍava ; she then came to the—to my mind unwarranted—conclusion that the performers 
displayed in a number of panels must represent the God himself.

--- [Page 31] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 43
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014in those described in Old Javanese epigraphic and textual sources.91 Among such 
Balinese ceremonies are those involving Sidha Karya, a character that evokes many 
of the antinomian, and more speciically Tantric, features that we have seen in the 
performing igures thus far discussed. Sidha Karya is a dancer and, at the same time, 
a comic masked performer, who appears at the end of topeng pajegan  masked dance-
drama. As put by Hildred Geertz (1994:125), he has the aspect of 
an old man with bright eyes, a smiling, bucktoothed mouth, and large bushy white mustache and 
eyebrows. He enacts an odd comic dance […]. He is said to be a form of the demon Kala, and his act 
dramatizes the submission of the demon and his transformation into a being of beneicent attitudes 
toward the congregation. 
A popular Balinese etymology of Sidha Karya is “the completion of the work,” 
i.e. “the one who accomplishes ( siddha ) the ritual work” ( kārya, more correctly  
‘religious performance’, cf. OJED 813 and supra: 29). This is likely to be an ex-post, 
‘“folk-etymology” of an original Sanskrit adjectival compound siddhakārya , which 
means “one whose object is accomplished,” hence “one whose acts are fulilled 
[supernaturally]”; compare the Old Javanese siddhikāra , “one who acts through 
magical powers” or “one who performs wonders.”92 The name comprises the word 
siddha,  “a perfect one,” in other contexts denoting a class of Śaiva and Buddhist 
Tantric igures.93 
Sidha Karya is indeed a character possessing special knowledge and magical 
powers (Dunn 1983:80). He embodies an odd blend of demonic and divine, and is in 
fact “associated with the kings of Bali in ancient times which have a pre-Majapahit 
rākṣasa  or demonic appearance”; his frightening and semi-demonic look is referred 
to in Balinese as aeng , which means “tremendous,” “dreadful,” or “terrifying” (Dunn 
1983:45). His pedigree and identity is portrayed in many ways according to different 
local traditions, e.g. as “the great laughing king,” or the son of a Śaiva priestess and 
a Buddhist priest, or himself a priest from India (Keling). Sidha Karya’s “appearance 
in the mask form is attributed to his power to change himself into different forms, 
a power associated with the gods who take even demonic manifestations” (Dunn 
1983:76). Margaret Coldiron, in an unpublished paper titled “The Tantric root of 
Sidha Karya” (2007), has stressed the fundamentally “unorthodox” and contradictory 
nature of this Balinese mask character:
91. Cf. Hunter’s remarks: “The ‘tellers of historical tales’ ( amacangah ) spoken of in Sumanasāntaka  are 
also believed to have their modern descendants in the topeng  dances of Bali, where masked performers 
enact tales from ‘dynastic histories’ ( babad ) rather than the mythological events related in the shadow 
theatre’ (Worsley et al. 2013:576); compare Cohen (2011:143), who speaks of the Javano-Balinese 
Sanghyang trance-dance as ‘very ancient and simultaneously tied to the local ritual economy.”
92. OJED (1759) lists siddhikāra  but does not gloss it; s.v. aniddhikāra , sumiddhikāra , siniddhikāra , 
and paniddhikāra , it gives “to apply magical power to, effect by magic, change by magic.”
93. De Casparis (1956:226) records the expression kabikuan iṅ siddhakārya , “the monastery (called) 
Siddhakārya” (or, rather, the monastery of the Siddhakārya(s)?) occurring in the Lintakan copperplate 
of 919 AD.

--- [Page 32] ---
Andrea Acri 44
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Sidha Karya is one of the most sacred and signiicant of Balinese mask characters, yet his appearance 
and behaviour are mysterious. He is holy, but a joker; reined, yet coarse; divine, yet demonic—in 
short, a mass of contradictions. […] Does the mask represent a “Buddhist Brahmin from Java,” an 
ancient Balinese demon-king or an ascetic evangelist from India? What is his signiicance in the 
ritual dance drama in which the performance of this mask often seems dramatically irrelevant, but 
is utterly essential? 
According to various Balinese stories—with variants with respect to details—
reported by oral informants or written chronicles ( babad ), Sidha Karya was a 
Brahman travelling from Java, who arrived at Pura Besakih when an important ritual 
to avert the disgrace that had fallen upon the kingdom was being performed.  On 
account of his ilthy attire, he was not believed to be a real Brahman; he was not 
allowed to cross the temple’s premises, but rather ordered to go south ( kelod )—an 
inauspicious point of the compass, associated with the Demonic in both Indic and 
Javano-Balinese cosmology.94 Sidha Karya cursed the ritual, which resulted in even 
direr consequences for the kingdom and its inhabitants. Eventually, his Brahmanic 
status and kinship relationship with the ruling prince is recognized, and Sidha Karya 
“makes the ritual complete,” thereby healing the kingdom. Coldiron (2007) describes 
the crucial event as follows:
He appears in the king’s court unwashed, covered in ash—the ashes of the cremated dead—he has 
no time for court manners and he laughs at the mundane concerns of those who have not passed 
through the […] renunciation of the body’s needs and desires.
As a magically powerful “outsider,” and an antinomian ascetic who has mastered 
impurity, Sidha Karya is the most qualiied person to accomplish the ritual—unlike 
the Śaiva Saiddhāntika high oficiant ( pedanda Śiva ) who, in his purity, cannot deal 
with the forces operating at the bhūta  level.
In an earlier study, Coldiron (2005b:241) drew attention to the apparent 
similarities between this igure and the Tantric Siddhas known from Vajrayāna 
Buddhism, observing that, although the Sidha Karya’s dance contains elements of 
entertainment like storytelling and buffoonery, it is mainly “addressed to the gods 
and fulill a purely ritual function,” including the appeasement of the bhūta kāla s or 
malignant ghostly beings . She further pointed out that the performances of the Sidha 
Karya are characterized by music (“insistent, rhythmic, with a pulse that uses an 
interval reserved for supernatural characters and ights”); laughter and screams/cries 
(“indicative of a powerful, supernatural character”); erratic movements; recitation 
of mantras and offerings to the cardinal directions, beginning from the South (the 
demonic/inauspicious point of the compass) and ending with Śiva in the centre. 
Sidha Karya’s mask may be white or black; a third eye—Śiva’s attribute—is 
represented in the middle of the forehead. Some masks have large teeth and wide 
grin, whereas others have fangs (see ig. 16). The igure shares with demonic 
94. The south is conceived as the abode of Kāla and demons in general, as well as a synonym of 
wilderness and pestilence (cf. Headley 2004:321–322). 

--- [Page 33] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 45
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014characters his bushy eyebrows, moustache, large eyes, and unruly hair; however, 
‘while iconographically the character looks a lot like a demon, narratively we know 
that this is a high-class Brahman’ (Kodi et al. 2005:176). His Brahmanical pedigree 
and ascetic attire oddly mixed with demonic and frightening features, stylized lines 
on the face that seem to denote laughter, his ash-smear (originating from a corpse), 
his dance, all conjure up the prototypical devotee of Rudra/Bhairava, an anchorite 
of the Pāśupata, Kāpālika, or Siddha type. Coldiron (2005a:186) describes his dance 
as follows: 
Sidha Karya laughs maniacally, as if privy of some great joke at the expense of the audience. He 
waves his white cloth, laughs, executes bird-like hops to the right and left , laughs again in the 
manner of Rangda and then rushes at the audience. (My italics)
Besides the laughter, common to all traditions discussed so far, note the striking 
similarity with the bird-like hops to the left and right feet performed by the canthang 
balung s. According to Coldiron, Sidha Karya’s sideways hops indicate his magical 
powers; to jump as a bird, and to dance in a frenzy way, is forbidden in the daily life in 
Bali.95 Interestingly, similar side-hops are also seen in the Sanbasö dance performed by 
the Japanese mask Okina. On account of the strikingly similar iconographic features, 
the style of their dance, and the use of mantras and mudrā s by both characters, Coldiron 
(2005b:240–244) has suggested that Okina and Sidha Karya may derive from a 
common Tantric Buddhist source, probably originating from Java,96 and ultimately 
“Kaliṅga”—i.e. Andhra or Orissa, which was an important center for the trade route 
between India, Southeast Asia, and China.97 A “Kaliṅga-connection” was already 
pointed out by Emigh (1996) who, in his analysis to the Balinese masks of Rangda and 
Barong, suggested that the demonic igures of Balinese dance-drama may originate 
from the Tantric practices of that region in India. Coldiron, however, concludes that 
no certain model has as yet been found. While a Tantric Buddhist pedigree cannot be 
ruled out, I ind a direct derivation of Sidha Karya from a prototypical Śaiva Atimārga, 
i.e. Pāśupata or Kāpālika, ascetic a more plausible hypothesis.98 
95. I thank an anonymous reviewer for this information.
96. Cf. Coldiron 2005b:230: “While it is true that Buddhism is a feature of both Balinese and Japanese 
cultures, there is a growing body of evidence indicating that the source of the Tantric Buddhist inluence 
that informs the iconography of these masks was not China but rather Southeast Asia, speciically Java. 
[…] The Hindu-Buddhist culture of Bali is, of course, directly connected to that of pre-Muslim Java, 
but there is also new evidence indicating ‘Indonesian’ inluences on the arts of early Japan.” Coldiron 
refers to the work by Ann Kumar on ancient Javanese inluences on Japan, and to David George’s 
suggestion that the Chinese Dragon is a representation of a creature from Java.
97. In Bali kĕliṅ  is generally meant to refer to (East) Java, but the name could actually refer to the 
“kingdom of Kalinga-nagaram, centred in what is now the coastal border region of Orissa and Andhra 
Pradesh” (Emigh 1996:77; cf. also Dunn 1987:74). The identiication of Old Javanese kǝliṅ  (i.e. the 
various kǝliṅ s) is controversial: for a detailed linguistic and historical discussion, cf. Damais 1964, 
especially pp. 96–111.
98. A fruitful line of enquiry would be to compare the Balinese and Japanese ritual dances to Indic 
Tantric (Buddhist) dances from Tibet and Nepal, such as the Newari dance Bhairab Naach (“Bhairava’s 

--- [Page 34] ---
Andrea Acri 46
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Fierce deities and demonic devotees
As we have seen above, in the Sanskritic tradition fringe groups such as the 
Pāśupatas and Kāpālikas “survived mainly in the literary and religious texts of their 
opponents as stereotypical villains, buffoons, or heretics […] sprinkled with ashes; 
adorned with the six insignia; and holding a khaṭvāṅga  club, a skull ( kapāla ), ḍamaru 
and mṛdaṅga  drums, and a trumpet” (Lorenzen 2000:83). These wandering (pseudo-)
ascetics were ridiculed in a number of plays, where they igured as hedonistic yet 
“scruffy, long-haired denizens of the margins of the Indian social institutions” 
(Davidson 2002:114).99 In a similar fashion, the extant information about these fringe 
groups in the Javanese setting has survived to us in the form of critiques or satires by 
courtly literati who evidently adhered to mainstream, householder-oriented religious 
currents. For instance, in RK 24.112 a kuvoṅ -bird is characterized as a vidu, a homeless 
and unattached wayang-player, and accused of posing as a taṇḍa functionary; he is 
declared to be guṇya  (“having manifold supernatural abilities,” “powerful,” or: “a 
sorcerer”) and saguṇa  (“possessing magical/supernatural powers”).100 In 24.114 the 
kuvoṅ  invites a she- kuvoṅ  to become a female ascetic ( kili) and bring satisfaction to 
naked wandering ascetics ( kalavan  lagnāmutusana ), thereby becoming an object of 
enjoyment ( bhukti ) for the devotees ( bhakta ) in the forest, who have low-ranking 
wives ( kula-kula ).101
dance”) and Caryā Nṛtya (cf. Wedemeyer 2013:257–258, note 130). Samuel (2006:26), discussing the 
female deities associated in India with ierce deity rituals and the propitiation of categories of Indian 
malignant spirits, maintains that “masked igures possessed by these deities have played an important 
role in the ritual cycles of Hindu communities from the Nepal Valley to Kerala, Bengal, and Bali.” 
A link between ritual, possession, and dramatic art has survived up to the modern time among the 
performers of the Terukkūttu (“street drama”) in Tamil Nadu, among which “the boundary between 
performance and ritual is so thin as to be nonexistent,” and during which performances “at least one 
of the principal actors become possessed” (Hart 1987:477). Hart concludes that “there is no reason to 
suppose that performance in ancient Tamilnad was any different: indeed the poems show that the low-
caste performers often became possessed and danced in a frenzied manner.”
99. The South Indian farce Mattavilāsa  (7th century AD) portrays a Kāpālika as a hedonist engaged in 
wild dances, parties involving the consumption of meat and alcohol, and enjoying sexual intercourse 
with his partner, a dancing Kapālinī called Devasomā; v. 20 describes him as “having as hairs a wild 
and tangled mess, wearing a withered garland around his neck, his body covered with dust and ash […] 
a garbage heap in the form of a man” (Lorenzen 2000:94). 
100. See Acri 2011a:62. Intriguingly, Tantric practitioners are referred to as guṇiā  in contemporary 
Orissa (cf. Keul 2013:6, who speaks of “local tantriks” connected to Yoginī-cults, cremation-ground 
offerings and healing practices); among the Baigals of Central India and the Santhals of (South-)
Eastern India, gunia  means “sorcerer” (Koppers 1940-41:770). See also below, Pārthayajña 8.9, and 
the nicknames of the two canthang balung s mentioned in footnote 80.
101. See Acri 2011a:84. In my earlier contribution I did not mention the possibility that kula-kula  may 
be a pun, implying a reference to the kula in the sense of “clans” or “families” (of initiated devotees, 
Yoginīs, and minor goddesses) around which revolved the theology and (orgiastic) ritual practice of 
the Tantric texts of the Kaula stream—themselves probably derived from an earlier Kāpālika milieu. 
Samuel (2006:26), when discussing Kāpālika-related practices, speaks about “the widespread role of 
low-caste ritual specialists in relation to kingship and political power, a pattern that has been identiied 
in early Tamil literature and occurs in different forms in many parts of South Asia and the Himalayas. If 
ierce deity practices were originally performed by such low-caste specialists, then the kula, ‘families,’ 

--- [Page 35] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 47
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014A seemingly related category of low-status, power-seeking ascetics and performers 
who were active in non-courtly milieux is scornfully portrayed in stanza 6 and 9 of 
the eighth canto of the ca. 15th-century kakavin Pārthayajña :
hana viku maṅidan maṅidǝri bhuvana 
makuravit agǝluṅ sukǝr aburarutan 
tǝhǝr ikana purih niṅ avak apǝniṅan 
si hurip ika ya vastu sukǝr aburarutan (6)
There are ascetics who behave in a crazy manner, wandering through the world;
untidy, hindered by their matted hair, in disorder.
So is the natural state of the body [of one] exerting [himself in performing austerities]. 
The Life principle is in fact hindered, in disorder.
hana viku maṅigǝl macarita rinubuṅ
biṣa tivas ika siṅ vvaṅ atika vihikan
vvaṅ atika maṅalǝm ri guṇa nika lǝvih
vvaṅ atika saṅ asuṅ mamiguṇani guṇa (9)
There are ascetics who dance and recite stories, surrounded [by spectators].
Everyone should know that they are powerful [and yet] they come to nothing.
Such persons boast of their exceeding magical powers;
Such persons are the ones who render magical powers worthless.
The above description epitomizes a class of Indic wandering anchorites of the 
Śaiva Pāśupata and Kāpālika- or Siddha-type respectively; these were despised in 
Sanskrit sources by the mainstream religious establishment on account of their uniting 
a quest for supernatural powers ( siddhi , guṇa ) with a career in the performing arts, 
and especially because of their “crazy” behaviours and antinomian practices. The 
Kāpālikas practiced the observance of the Pāśupatas ( pāśupatavrata ), who enjoined 
the use of song, dance and drama in the worship of Rudra-Śiva and, concealing their 
Brahmanical (hence, pure) status, behaved improperly and indecently in order to 
cause contempt in the common people:
It was prescribed that he [the Pāśupata adept] snore, tremble, limp, play the lecher, act improperly 
and speak nonsensical words in full view of people. Such ridiculous actions were to be performed 
so as to give the impression that he was a madman ( unmatta ) and thus provoke disgust and contempt 
(avamāna ). (Hara 1994:120)
Pāśupatasūtra  3.11 prescribes that the Pāśupata practitioner
Should go about like an outcaste . [… Commentary:] He should appear as though mad, like a 
pauper, his body covered with ilth, letting his beard, nails and hair grow long, without any bodily 
care. Hereby he becomes cut off from the respectable castes and conditions of men and gives rise 
to disgust (trans. Ingalls 1962:289).
of early tantric practice may derive from the families who carried them out.”

--- [Page 36] ---
Andrea Acri 48
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014The autocommentary Svopajñavṛtti  to Yogaśāstra  by the 11th–12th century Jain 
polymath Hemacandra (4.102.26–31) scornfully describes certain ascetics who take 
up and abandon the pāśupatavrata  according to their own advantage, and behave in 
other (even more) extravagant ways typical of the Kāpālikas. The passage depicts 
these ascetics with their hairs twisted together in a mass ( jaṭāpaṭala ), their limbs 
covered with ashes ( bhasmāṅga ), dancing and singing ( gītanṛtya ), farting ( putau 
vādayat- ) and roaring ( nādavidhāyin- ) by drumming on their mouths as if it were 
a percussion-instrument ( vadananādenātodya ), attacking sages, gods and men with 
deceits ( asatyabhāṣā ), breaking their observances ( vratabhaṅga ) out of their desire 
“to become slaves of slave-girls” ( dāsīdāsatvam icchat- ), carrying ornaments made of 
human bones ( narāsthibhūṣaṇabhṛt- ) and a pike or khaṭvāṅga  (śūlakhaṭvāṅgavāhin -), 
wearing bells on their ankles ( ghaṇṭānupūradhārin- ), indulging in the enjoyment 
of drink, meat and sex ( madyamāṃsāṅganābhogaprasakta- ), continually 
singing ( gāyat- ) and dancing ( nṛtyat- ) with bells tied around their buttocks 
(putānubaddhaghaṇṭa- ).
From the scant textual evidence on the beliefs and practices of Kāpālikas and their 
female attendants, the Kapālinīs or Yoginīs, which has survived to us through Śaiva 
sources of the Kaula or Bhairavatantra stream, we know that these practitioners aimed 
at achieving a direct connection with their demonic iṣṭadevatā , the male Bhairava 
and/or various terrifying manifestations of the Goddess. This union was achieved via 
their observance of mimicking or taking upon themselves some of his/her features 
in order to reach a complete identiication with him/her, i.e. be “penetrated” or 
possessed ( āveśa ) in a trance-like state, often triggered through orgiastic rituals (e.g. 
gaṇacakrapūjā  and yoginīmelāpa ), drinking bouts, and frantic dances on cremation 
grounds . The  “odd” whole-body postures, called mudrā,  assumed by the followers 
of these groups in their ritual dances were intended to induce a state of possession; 
through the experience of violent emotions triggered by the transgression of social and 
dietary rules of purity, these adepts identiied themselves with their wrathful tutelary 
deities, becoming his/her—“theatrical,” so to speak—human embodiments.102
Scholars generally consider that Bhairaivika Śaivism was introduced in 
Nusantara, and especially in the East Javanese kingdoms of Kạiri and Siṅhasāri, 
only since the 12th century. But traces of Tantric cults are already discernible during 
the Central Javanese period. An incontrovertible allegorical reference to Śiva-
Bhairava is found in an Old Javanese inscription from the Ratu Boko plateau dated 
856 AD (de Casparis 1956:265–266, 271). There the princely igure of Kumbhayoni 
likens himself to a terrifying form of Śiva-Bhairava, who is described as performing 
an exalted tāṇḍava -dance—and, at the same time, meditating—on a corpse in a 
cremation ground, wearing a snake-thread, necklace, armband and leg-ornaments 
102. For a fascinating account of these ritual or ritualized practices, as described in unpublished Śaiva 
sources, cf. the public lecture ”Pleasure and the Emotions in Tantric Śaiva Soteriology” (especially 
mins. 40–60) delivered by Prof. Alexis Sanderson at the University of Hamburg on 07-06-2013  
(http://lecture2go.uni-hamburg.de/veranstaltungen/-/v/15161; last accessed 24-01-2014). 

--- [Page 37] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 49
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014made by the King of the Nāgas ( phaṇīndra ), adorned with blood-dripping heads 
of the kings defeated by him.103 The typical hairdos and attires characterizing the 
iconography of Bhairava, demons, and Kāpālika ascetics, such as ornaments of 
human skulls, Brahmanic cords and armbands made of snakes, feature in reliefs of 
the Loro Jonggrang temple complex.104 A trace of Kāpālika-Bhairavika Śaivism can 
also be discerned in panel VII.11d of Caṇ̣i Śiva, depicting a frenzy war dance by a 
fanged Yoginī accompanied by the music of mṛḍaṅga  drums, overseen by a character 
looking like a Brahman, who is reciting from a palm-leaf manuscript (ig. 10). A 
worshiper of Kāla ( ikaṅ iṣṭi kāla ) is linked to a tiger ( harimoṅ ), Śiva’s vehicle, in 
RK 25.09;105 “Bhairava” and “Bhairavamārga” appear among the sects described in 
early Old Javanese texts, such as the Agastyaparva  and Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan 
(cf. Goris 1926:101–103); the term ( saṅ brāhmaṇa ) kāpālikabrata  “(a Brahman) 
adhering to the observance of the Kāpālikas” is attested in the probably 10th-century 
Udyogaparva  (45.4). It may be therefore safely assumed that these groups and their 
Tantric lore, rituals, and underlying theology, were known realities in the Javanese 
imaginaire  already in the Central Javanese period.
Tantric imagery becomes more pronounced, and pervasive, in the Śaiva and 
Buddhist art of the Kạiri-Sṅhasāri period in East Java; it recrudesces during the 
late Majapahit period, culminating in what Stutterheim (1956b:117–118) called 
a Javano-Balinese cult of Bhīma-Bhairava. According to Stutterheim, this very 
Bhīma—i.e. the demonic, skull-bearing ascetic aspect of Śiva known as Bhairava (of 
identical meaning, “the terrible/frightful”)—rather than (only) the popular Pāṇ̣ava 
hero of the Mahābhārata  is the protagonist of the Navaruci , a ca. 16th-century Old/
Middle Javanese soteriological text that narrates Bhīma’s mystical journey towards 
enlightenment or self-puriication.  The story of the Navaruci , also known through 
the related Bhīmasuci  and Bhīmasvarga, constitutes, as shown by Hinzler (1981:29), 
a common plot for old as well as modern wayang narratives and performances. 
103. The same antinomian and martial imagery is found in a number of Sanskrit hymns dedicated to 
Śiva-Rudra from Bali; cf. especially Śivastava , vv. 8–10 (Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971:290–293), 
and also Rudragāyatrīdhyāna  (pp. 299–300). As Jordaan and myself (2012) have argued, some of these 
stuti may be contemporary or even older than the temple complex of Loro Jonggrang, being apparently 
connected to the iconographic and architectural plan of Caṇ̣i Śiva. 
104. E.g. on Caṇ̣i Śiva, in a igure that I have identiied as Kāla—cf. Acri and Jordaan 2012:301–302. 
An actual skull-bowl has been unearthed in Central Java, in the mountains to the north of Prambanan 
(cf. Stutterheim 1956b:125, fn. 44; Jordaan 1996:73). The use of skulls ( kapāla ) as drinking-bowls is 
described in the ca. 15th century Tantu Paṅgәlaran  (cf. OJED 797 s.v.). 
105. The Sanskrit-Old Javanese Śaiva text Mahājñāna  (comm. ad śloka 27) deines the materialist 
doctrine as “the knowledge of the agitated among men, […] the knowledge of Kāla” ( kālajñāna ). The 
expression “agitated among men” is my tentative translation of  kagivan , a passive from aṅgivaṅ  (“to 
shake”), glossed by OJED (532) as “in violent commotion, deeply moved, agitated” (also used, as in 
Śri Tañjuṅ , in the sense of “moving to the tune of the gamelan”); compare agivaṅan , “moving to and 
fro, in violent motion.” The word is apparently connected to a frantic dance. It is worth noting that  the 
Kāpālikas and Pāśupatas were often characterized as hedonists or epicureans associated (purportedly or 
not) by their mainstream detractors with the materialists—the lowest among the philosophical schools 
codiied in the Sanskritic tradition (see Lorenzen 1991:47–48, 88–89, 217). 

--- [Page 38] ---
Andrea Acri 50
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Stutterheim’s identiication is supported by the cemetery-lore that accompanies the 
igure of Bhīma, by his behaviour inclined to violence and rage, drunkenness and 
orgies, and by the features of his iconography, namely his high-worn headdress, 
snake-bracelets and erect exposed penis, his frantic dance performed while 
standing on a corpse, surrounded by demons drinking from skulls.106 The comic—
or grotesque—aspect of the Divine, represented in his demonic form of trickster, 
is evident in a passage of the Navaruci  (p. 53.2–10) that the editor and translator 
Prijohoetomo deemed to be corrupt, arguably on account of its enigmatic and sinister 
content (cf. p. 110, fn. 2). Having described the invisible and formless aspect of God 
as V oid and non-existence ( tayā), the Guru explains to Bhīma the form(s) taken as 
incarnation by the Lord ( bhaṭāra , usually standing for Śiva):
[…] dadi vvaṅ ta ya, dadi lanaṅ, dadi vadon; dadi satto masuku pat, rumaṅkaṅ, lumur vәtәṅnya, 
satto liṅanku iri ya. Tan ana kucivanya riṅ dadi vvaṅ. Vәruh maṅigәl mavәḍihan, bisa maṅiduṅ 
macarita, vәruh mayoga masamādhi; prajña śakti, tan anāmaḍani. Kunaṅ pinakāhāranira, tan 
pati papaṅanira: amaṅan pva avaknira ḍavak, aṅinum pva ya rahira ḍavak. Irika ta ya saṅ maavak 
tan alara ta ya; tan endah, tuhu sukha gumuyu. Tan paṅinak-inak avan iṅ uvus laṅguk. Kaśaktin 
mevәh viveka riṅ aji.
[… The Lord,] He becomes a human being; He becomes a male, He becomes a female; He becomes 
a four-legged animal, moving on all fours, His belly facing down. I would say, that is an animal 
(sattva ).107 There is no inferiority in His becoming a human being. He knows to dance wearing a 
vәḍihan ;108 He is skilled in singing and reciting. He knows to perform yoga and absorption. He is 
endowed with Gnosis and Power, there is nobody who equals Him. As for what constitutes His 
food, He pays little attention to what He eats:109 He eats his own body, He drinks his own blood. In 
Him, the embodied [soul] does not suffer. He is not beautiful; He really likes to laugh. His manner 
of haughty speaking is not pleasant. [Being only] supernaturally mighty, He is in trouble with the 
discernment of the sacred scriptures.
The divine igure described in the passage appears to have many of the features 
attributed to both Bhīma/Bhairava and Bhīma the Pāṇ̣ava, son of Vāyu. In fact, in 
the Navaruci  Bhīma (the Pāṇ̣ava hero) discovers to be Bhīma (a manifestation of 
the Godhead) through esoteric instruction and a process of self-puriication. The 
Pāṇ̣ava Bhīma is a mighty, and often wrathful and impulsive, warrior of gigantic 
proportions, whose strong point is almost uniquely his physical strength; in both 
106. For a detailed study of this Bhīma-cult, with special reference to iconography, cf. Duijker 2010.
107. Satto  here represents a common alternative spelling of sattva , which in Old Javanese can mean 
either “living being, creature, animal” or “good, pure, virtuous” (OJED 1713). 
108. The meaning recorded in OJED s.v. wĕḍihan  and mawĕḍihan,  is “wearing garments.” One may 
wonder whether the word relects a title, or a typology of performer or oficial. A pavĕḍihan  is attested 
in 11th to 13th century inscriptions among the vatәk i jro  (maṅilala dṛvya haji )—among whose are also 
the vidus—“in charge of collecting a contribution in clothes, pamĕḍihan ?” (OJED 2233). A  pamәḍihan  
is mentioned along with juru buyut  in the Old Javanese copperplate inscription of Penampihan (1269 
AD; cf. Brandes 1913, inscr. 79, 4b.3).
109. Pati in this case may be pati IV , “to give special attention to, bestow great care on, take great pains 
over, make a special effort […],” (OJED 1323).

--- [Page 39] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 51
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014the Sanskrit and Javanese versions of the Mahābhārata  he is known as vṛkodara , 
“wolf-bellied,” because of his insatiable appetite.110 The other features of this divine 
igure mentioned there, such as the ability to dance ( maṅigәl),  sing ( maṅiduṅ ) and 
recite ( macarita ), his propensity to violently laugh ( gumuyu ), his proiciency in yoga 
(mayoga ), his possession of Gnosis ( prajñā ) and Power ( śakti ), are all consonant 
with those attributed to Bhīma/Bhairava, and at the same time relected in the igures 
of antinomian, power-seeking performers as the vidu and pirus . The references to 
Bhīma as paying no attention to his diet, and especially as eating his own body and 
drinking his own blood, call to mind the dietary habits of Atimārga practitioners111 and 
the notorious practice of cannibalism and blood-drinking attributed to the Kāpālikas, 
respectively. The reference to self-cannibalism inds a striking parallel in the stories 
about the origin of the popular architectural element of Kālamukha, the demon-head 
standing as a guardian above doorways of temples and monumental ediices in South 
and Southeast Asia, which in Java and Bali was identiied with Bhaṭāra Kāla, and 
connected with the malpal  style of dancing performed by “demonic” characters of 
Balinese topeng pajegan . According to a popular legend, Kāla, out of a permanently 
insatiable hunger—and at Śiva’s request, in order to save other living beings—
devoured his own body, thereby leaving only his head.112 One of the appellatives 
and manifestations of Bhīma/Bhairava is Kāla, “the Dark/Black one” or “Time” (as 
devourer of everything). Kāla/Bhairava was the chief deity of the Kāpālikas.
A popular Balinese tradition, attested in several texts such as the Javano-Balinese 
Kāla Purāṇa and the Balinese Kidung Saṅ Empu Leger  (Hooykaas 1973:244–266; 
cf. also 307–311), narrates about the vicissitudes of the brothers Kāla and Kumāra, 
sons of Śiva and his consort Umā. The Kāla Purāṇa  (cf. Stephen 2002:67–71) relates 
how the ever-hungry Kāla wanted to devour Kumāra on account of the fact that he 
had been given by Śiva the right to eat all persons born on the day his younger 
brother’s birth. The story is still represented on Bali, in slightly different versions, in 
(comic) performances held during temple-festivals. Rather than being just a source 
110. “He becomes a four-legged animal, moving on all fours, His belly facing down” may be an apt 
characterization of a wolf.
111. Pāśupatasūtra 5.32 and Pañcārthabhāṣya ad 5.30 explain that the ascetic should feed with 
whatever he may ind, i.e. food acquired by chance ( yathālābdha ); the Sanskrit Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa 
(II.74.50cd–55) speaks of the observance of the bull ( govrata ), also practiced by the Pāśupatas, in terms 
of do not distinguishing at all “what is to be eaten and drunk, and what is not” (cf. Acharya 2013:115). 
As we have seen above (p. 22), ascetics characterized by this dietary habit were allegorically compared 
to pigeons in some Sanskrit Śaiva Saiddhāntika texts, as well as in RK 25.108d. Sumanasāntaka  13.6 
scornfully describes an ascetic eating his food on a rubbish heap, yet declaring that “he eats nothing 
that is not pure.”
112. A similar legend, featuring Kīrttimukha, is narrated in the Sanskrit Skandapurāṇa ; in the Śivapurāṇa  
he is identiied with a faithful devotee guarding the doors of Śaiva temples (Smith 1998:199). Many 
variants exist. According to one version, Kāla stole the elixir of life from the gods and burned in the 
process, keeping only his head; in Java and Bali Kāla(mukha) is often depicted as eating the sun—for in 
fact he represents Rāhu, the demon who causes eclipses. A Balinese version of the story, transmitted in 
the Kapiparva , narrates about the monkey-god Anoman eating the sun; this inds a parallel in South Asian 
literatures (cf. Vickers 2011:127). On the link between Hanumān and Kāla-Bhairava, cf. above, fn. 88. 

--- [Page 40] ---
Andrea Acri 52
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014of amusement, such parodic performances are regularly enacted for apotropaic 
aims.113 Wayang performances of the legend of the birth of Kāla are conducted in 
Java by dalang s for exorcistic purposes (Headley 2004:321, 330). 
It is tempting to connect the b(h)imma  in the expression b(h)imma  (ya) kumāra  
found in the above-discussed 10th-century Sangsang copperplate—mentioning 
pirus es, dancers, and musicians in the context of a ritual performance—with the 
demonic manifestation of Śiva known under the names of Kāla, Bhairava, and 
Bhīma, and take the inscription as referring to a re-enactment, for “puriicatory” 
ritual purposes, of a pre-10th century (oral?) version of the story of Kāla and Kumāra, 
which we only know from later Middle Javanese and Balinese texts, as well as 
Javanese “exorcistic” wayang performances.114 
Conclusion
This article has attempted to bridge the “classical” past and the present through 
suggesting a premodern, and ultimately Indic, origin of speciic Javano-Balinese 
performances and performers. In doing so I have followed an approach that is in 
harmony with Rubin and Sedana’s (2007:79) considerations on Balinese dance-
drama, arguing that “new forms develop and evolve continually […], but they grow 
out as branches, rather than exist as completely separate species.” 
Building on, and ine-tuning, the work of Stutterheim, Becker, and Coldiron, I 
have pinpointed the remarkable analogies that can be detected between speciic Śaiva 
traditions of itinerant, performance-oriented antinomian practitioners known from the 
Indian Subcontinent and what I have argued to be their  Javano-Balinese descendants. 
On the strength with a comparative analysis of Old Javanese and Sanskrit textual 
accounts, combined with insights from art history and ethnography, I have tried to make 
a point for the continued existence in Java over a thousand years of performances—i.e. 
music, dance, buffoonery, and recital—featuring a mix of laughter and comicality, 
sexual exhibitionism and (real or enacted) promiscuity between male and female 
dancers, and the consumption of alcoholic drinks. The bearded, moustached, and often 
scruffy attire of many of the performing characters, their connection with a Brahmanic 
113. As Stephen (2002:77–79) argues: “The signiicance of wayaṅ  performances and other 
entertainments as the means of causing Durgā and Kāla Rudra to return to their positive forms of Śiwa 
and Umā […] seems to me an idea worthy of considerably more attention than has previously been 
given it. […] Kāla Rudra and Durgā were publicly shamed and their actions parodied in song, dance 
and wayaṅ  theatre. […] Why? Because parody and humour are used to point to the evil doings of the 
god and goddess. There is no power that can control Śiwa and Umā in their terrible forms, only they 
can choose to transform themselves, but ridicule and laughter can cause shame and thus bring the pair 
to self-awareness.” 
114. As we have seen above (pp. 19-20), Kumāra is in RK 25.24cd linked to peacocks, which themselves 
are mentioned alongside a ḍarapati  (pigeon) alias pirus  in 24.106. I wonder whether the mythical 
and literary association between Kumāra and Bhīma is relected in a real-world association between 
dancing devotees of Kumāra and a class of comic performers, called pirus,  who were devotees of 
Bhīma/Bhairava.

--- [Page 41] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 53
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014milieu, or in any event with Sanskritic high-culture, supernatural powers, and Śaiva 
or Tantric insignia (e.g. the canthang balung s’ “rattling bones,” liṅga-yoni  emblem, 
strings of lowers, poleng -loincloth, pike, and “Brahmanic” cap/mitre), all conjure up 
a prototypical Indic milieu of wandering practitioners belonging to the Śaiva Atimārga 
and their numerous subgroups and developments, from the “proto-Tantric” Pāśupatas 
and Kārukas to the markedly antinomian Kāpālikas and Kālamukhas.115 Even though, 
given the paucity of data, it is admittedly dificult to trace a direct line of iliation, not to 
speak about capturing historical processes occurred over more than a thousand years, 
the body of evidence presented here points to a commonality of performance styles, 
ritual milieux, religious ideologies and regimens, and imaginaire s, which were shared 
by networks of performers in South Asia, Java, and Bali .116 
According to Holt (1967:104), although a observation that, although a general 
evolutionary line of Indonesian dance cannot be traced in view of the fact that “all 
stages are [simultaneously] present,” “it is possible to recognize in some dances 
the transformations they have undergone, to discover that the content and function 
of certain dances are reinterpretations of older conceptions, and to follow the 
secularization of ritual.” Applying to our discussion Holt’s observation, it may be 
argued that through the centuries these ascetics-cum-performers lost their religious 
prerogatives and adopted new fashions, gradually transforming into courtly, or 
115. Considering the predominance of Śaivism in Java from the 9th until the 16th century, where it 
“was not merely the religion of the courts but had put down deep roots in rural society” (Sanderson 
2003–04:351), the secondary role of Buddhism, and the even less signiicant presence of Vaiṣṇavism, it 
is only natural to focus—at least in the present discussion—on speciic Śaiva milieux rather than what 
are generally referred to as “ bhakti  movements,” whether Vaiṣṇava or Śaiva, which developed in the 
Indian Subcontinent in the course of the irst millennium CE. Even such (arguably post-12th century) 
Śaiva ascetic groups as the Vīraśaivas, Nātha Yogins and Liṅgāyats  have left scant, if any, traces in the 
literature and visual arts of Nusantara, in contrast with the irmer evidence available from the 9th century 
onwards on the Pāśupata, Kāpālika, and Bhairava traditions. On several occasions in the present 
discussion I have referred to studies linking performance traditions of a ritualized type widespread 
across Maritime Asia and the Himalayan region to Kāpālika/Siddha, Kaula, or (early) Tantric Buddhist 
milieux (Coldiron 2005a, 2005b; Wedemeyer 2013; Samuel 2006:26).
116. It may be objected that to regard the Javanese and Balinese developments throughout the modern 
period as being orthogenetically derived from a totality of Indic-style religious practices as they existed 
in Nusantara by the end of supposed “waves” of Indic inluence occurred before the 9th century runs 
the risk of incurring anachronism. While admitting the possibility of continued cultural exchange with 
South Asia throughout the second millennium, I should like to point out that the reception of Śaiva 
and Bauddha traditions in Java and Bali seems to have occurred in waves indeed, as suggested by the 
fact that the “localized” development of these religions retained archaic tracts, as if they received their 
features from a version of the tradition that relects an early stage of doctrinal and ritual development 
(cf. Acri 2011b:12–16; Nihom 1994:69–115, 189, and 1997); compare Sanderson (2001:22–23) on 
the variety of Śaivism followed by the ancient Khmers, where the Saiddhāntikas “remained cut off 
from the mainstream once their tradition had taken root”; and White (2000:21) on the export of Tantric 
Buddhist traditions from the Indian Subcontinent to East and Southeast Asia, where “the original 
revelation remained fossilized, like an insect in a block of amber, in the export tradition,” preserving as 
it does a “Tantric status quo of eighth-century India.” According to Nihom (1997:104, 109), this state 
of affairs has bearings on the chronology of religious and diplomatic contacts between the Indonesian 
Archipelago and the Indian Subcontinent, which may have been severed for more or less extended 
historical periods after the turn of the irst millennium, and since the early 16th century. 

--- [Page 42] ---
Andrea Acri 54
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014“temple-centred,” categories of performers. Some, as the canthang balun gs, retained 
only traces of their original sectarian marks, opportunistically adopting an Islamic garb 
and specializing in the performing arts as a means of livelihood; having engaged in a 
formal patron-client relation, they were integrated as low-level functionaries in the 
early 20th-century Central Javanese courts of Surakarta and Yogyakarta, where they 
played a role as comic entertainers during religious performances and superintendents 
of female singer-dancers. Others, having long since disappeared from the social and 
religious fabric, survived in the local imaginaire  and ritual economy as grotesque 
ancestral characters evocative of supernatural prowess—witness the Javanese buyut  
and the Balinese topeng  Sidha Karya. 
A seeming contradiction that emerges from both South Asian and Javano-
Balinese milieux is that those performers, whether in their original or “localised” 
subtypes, displayed an (actual or pretended) Brahmanical status and a connection 
with the Sanskritic tradition of the elites, yet at the same time they undoubtedly held 
a marginalized and low position in the social hierarchy because of their association 
with performance, vagrant lifestyle, promiscuity, and antinomian behaviours. Some 
of those characters apparently retained important functions in the performances held 
during particular life-cycle rituals—including weddings—or religious festivities 
sponsored by both the courtly elite and common folks (e.g. the Javanese pirus es 
and canthang balung s), or became an essential part of temple-based rituals (e.g. 
the Balinese Sidha Karya). This contradiction is dispelled if we think about these 
performances as being the historical offshoots of earlier Indic Tantric ceremonies 
dominated by the ritual logic and “elite ideology” of esoteric fringe practitioners 
seeking to instantiate the identity with the divinity “in concrete, lived, social space” 
(Wedemeyer 2013:258, note 130).117 The Javanese embodiments of these ceremonies 
were—and, in the case of Bali, still are—dictated by an apotropaic or puriicatory 
agenda; as such, they could only be staged by antinomian (ritual/theatrical) 
performers, who themselves (or the characters they typiied) lived at the margins 
of society and were connected with impurity and the Demonic,118 specializing in 
“pacifying” or “re-orienting” the evil forces.119 
117. According to Wedemeyer (2013:257–258 note 130), “There are very good reasons to believe that 
caryā dance [of the Newari Buddhist community of Nepal] is a contemporary, attenuated enactment 
of the Tantric rite of caryāvrata. […] caryānṛtya is performed ‘as a part of […] ritual especially on the 
occasion of tantric initiations, great festivals and important pujas’.” I believe that these illuminating 
considerations on Tantric Buddhist rituals and performances could be equally applied to the Javanese 
and Balinese spheres , where related Śaiva varieties of rituals and performances were predominant. 
118. Cf., e.g., Sanderson’s (2003–04:376) identiication of the modern Balinese Ṛṣi Bhujāṅga or 
Seṅguhu oficiants as local descendants of a class of Pāśupata practitioners, called Ṛṣis, who provided 
their ritual services (mostly of an exorcistic nature) to the rural population away from centres of worldly 
and religious authority. These practitioners are regarded by Brahmins as belonging to the fourth and 
lowest class ( śūdra ), and invoke or exorcize alternative sets of demons than those handled by the 
Pedanda Śiva. 
119. Stephen (2002:61–62) describes this process—mainly involving dramatic performances—of 
reorientation of dangerous, destructive, and chaotic forces as one of returning to peaceful, and ordered, 

--- [Page 43] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 55
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Bibliography
Primary Sources
Amarakośa  of Amarasiṅha, Amarakośa with the unpublished South Indian Commentaries , ed. A.A. 
Ramanathan. 3 V ols. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1971–1983.
Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa,  Het Oud-Javaansche Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa; Prozatekst en kakawin uitgegeven en 
van Aanteekeningen voorzien , ed. J. Gonda. Bandoeng: Nix, 1932.
Dharma Pātañjala,  cf. Acri 2011b.
Harṣacarita, The Harshacarita of Bāṇabhaṭṭa. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar , 1918. [Reprint, New Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1986].
Mahājñāna, Tattwajñāna and Mahājñāna , ed. Sudarshana Devi Singhal. New Delhi: International 
Academy of Indian Culture, 1962.
Manusmṛti,  Manusmṛti: With the Sanskrit Commentary Manvartha-Muktāvalī of Kullūka Bhaṭṭa , ed. 
J.L. Shastri. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983.
Nāṭyaśāstra,  Nāṭyaśāstra with the commentary of Abhinavagupta, ed. M. Ramakrishna Ravi. Baroda: 
Oriental Institute, 1934.
Navaruci,  Nawaruci: inleiding, Middel-Javaansche prozatekst, vertaling, vergeleken met de Bimasoetji 
in Oud-Javaansch metrum , ed. and trans. M. Prijohoetomo. Groningen: Wolters, 1934.
Pañcārthabhāṣya : cf. Pāśupatasūtra.
Pārthayajña,  Sĕkar Inikĕt, a Reader in Old Javanese Kakawin Literature; Part V; Pārthayajña, Old 
Javanese Text.  Edition by Thomas Hunter, unpublished manuscript dated 2011.
Pāśupatasūtra,  Pasupata Sutras with Pancharthabhashya of Kaundinya, ed. R. Anantakrishna Sastri. 
Trivandrum: The Oriental Manuscripts Library of the University of Travancore, 1940.
Raghuvaṃśa,  The Raghuvaṃśa of Kālidāsa with the commentary (the Sañjīvinī) of Mallināth. Ed. 
Kāśināth Pāṇ̣urang Parab. Ninth revised edition. Bombay: Nirnaya-Sagar Press, 1925.
Rāmāyaṇa kakavin,  cf. Santoso 1980.
Śabdakalpadruma, Shabda Kalpadrum, or an encyclopaedic dictionary of Sanskrit words  […] by Raja 
Radha Kantha Deva . Third Edition. Varanasi: The Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Ofice, 1967.
Sumanasāntaka, cf. Worsley et al. 2013.
Svopajñavṛtti  to Yogaśāstra,  Yogaśāstra  of Hemacandra with  Svopajñavṛtti , ed. Muni Jambuvijaya. 
Bombay: Jain Sāhitya Vikās Maṇ̣al, 1977–1986.
Udyogaparva, Udyogaparwa: Teks Jawa Kuna , ed. P.J. Zoetmudler. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana Univer -
sity Press, 1993. 
Vṛhaspatitattva,  Wṛhaspati-tattwa, an Old Javanese philosophical text . Ed. and trans. Sudarshana 
Devi. Nagpur: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1957.
origin or form ( marūpa somya ), and stresses that this is an important, yet often misunderstood, dynamic 
underlying Balinese ritual life. Compare Hart’s (1987:476–477) analogous observations on Tamil ritual 
dynamics and the relationship between royalty and low-status “exorcist”-performers: “The role of 
groups ‘of low birth’ in ancient Tamilnad was to control, or order, dangerous power. […] If then we 
return to the king as a sort of dynamic engine who transmutes inauspicious, disordered power into its 
ordered, benevolent analog, it becomes apparent that a primary source of this power was the low-caste 
performers who were attached to him.” 

--- [Page 44] ---
Andrea Acri 56
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Translations and Studies
Acharya, D., 2013, “How to Behave like a Bull? New Insight into the Origin and Religious Practices 
of Pāśupatas,” Indo-Iranian Journal 56: 101–131.
Acri, A., 2008, “The Vaimala Sect of the Pāśupatas. New Data from Old Javanese Sources,” Tantric 
Studies  1:193–208.
—, 2010, “On Birds, Ascetics, and Kings in Central Java. Rāmāyaṇa Kakawin , 24.96–126 and 25,” 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of 
Southeast Asia 166: 475–506.
—, 2011a, “More On Birds, Ascetics and Kings in Central Java. Kakawin Rāmāyaṇa , 24.111–115 and 
25.19–22,” in A. Acri, H. Creese and A. Grifiths (eds) From Laṅkā Eastwards.  Leiden: KITLV 
Press, 53–91.
—, 2011b, Dharma Pātañjala; A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied in the Light of Related Old 
Javanese and Sanskrit Texts. Groningen: Egbert Forsten Publishing.
Acri, A. and Grifiths, A., 2014, “The Romanization of Indic Script used in Ancient Indonesia,”  Bij-
dragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of 
Southeast Asia , 170-2/3: 365–378 .
Acri, A. and Jordaan, R., 2012, “The Dikpālas of Ancient Java revisited; A new identiication for the 
twenty-four directional deities on the Śiva temple of the Loro Jonggrang complex,”  Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia 
168-2/3: 274–313.
Barazer-Billoret, M.-L., 2001, “Les quatre stades de vie (āśrama) selon les textes āgamiques,” in C. 
Chojnacki (ed.), Les âges de la vie dans le monde indien. Actes des journées d’étude de Lyon 
(22–23 juin 2000). Lyon: Diffusion De Boccard, 33–49.
Beatty, A., 1999, Varieties of Javanese religion; An Anthropological Account . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University press.
Becker, J., 2004, Gamelan Stories: Tantrism, Islam, and Aesthetics in Central Java . (Second edition). 
Arizona State University: Program for Southeast Asian Studies. [1st ed. 1993]
Bloomield, M., 1924, “On false ascetics and nuns in Hindu iction,” Journal of the American Oriental 
Society  44:202–242.
Boechari, 2012a, “Some Considerations on the Problem of the Shift of Matarām’s Centre of Gover -
nemnt from Central to East Java in the 10th Century,” in N. Susanti, H. Djafar and A. Grifiths 
(eds.) , Melacak sejarah kuno Indonesia lewat prasasti/Tracing ancient Indonesian history through 
inscription s; Kumpulan tulisan/Writings of Boechari . Jakarta: Kepustakaan Populer  Gramedia in 
collaboration with the University of Indonesia and the École française  d’Extrême-Orient, 155–181. 
[Originally published as Bulletin of the Research Centre of Archaeology of Indonesia  10, 1976]. 
—, 2012b,  “Candi dan Lingkungannya,” in N. Susanti, H. Djafar and A. Grifiths (eds.) , Melacak seja-
rah kuno Indonesia lewat prasasti […]. Jakarta: Kepustakaan Populer  Gramedia […], 273–289. 
[Originally published as Majalah Ilmu-Ilmu Sastra Indonesia 7 (2), 1977].
—, 2012c, “Ulah para Pemungut Pajak di dalam Masyarakat Jawa Kuno,” in N. Susanti, H. Djafar and 
A. Grifiths (eds.) , Melacak sejarah kuno Indonesia lewat prasasti […]. Jakarta: Kepustakaan 
Populer  Gramedia […], 291–306. [Originally published as Majalah Arkeologi 4 (1/2), 1981].
Brakel-Papenhuizen, C., 1995, Classical Javanese Dance . Leiden: KITLV Press.
Brandes, J.L.A., 1913, Oud-Javaansche Oorkonden, Nagelaten transscripties van wijlen Dr. J.L.A. 
Brandes. Uitgegeven door Dr. N.J. Krom. Batavia, Albrecht & Co. / ’s-Hage, M. Nijhoff. [Verhan -
delingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap, LX.]

--- [Page 45] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 57
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Brandts Buys, J.S., 1933,  “Uit de pers. De tjaṇṭang baloeng ’s.—Javaansche en Balische kleppers.—
Beḍåjå ketawang .—Édan-édanan ,” Djåwå  13:258–262.
Brunner, H., G. Oberhammer, and A. Padoux, 2004, Tāntrikābhidhānakośa II; Dictionnaire des termes 
techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique . Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften.
de Casparis, J.G., 1956, Prasasti Indonesia II. Selected inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th century AD . 
Bandung: Masa Baru.
Cohen, M., 2011, “Brai in performance: devotion and art in Java,” in D. Harnish and A.K. Rasmussen 
(eds), Divine Inspiration: Music and Islam in Indonesia . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 132–160.
Coldiron, M.J., 2007 (Unpublished), “The Tantric Roots of Sidha Karya,” Draft paper presented at the 
5th EuroSEAS Conference, Naples, 11–15 September 2007.
—, 2005a, Trance and Transformation of the Actor in Japanese Noh and Balinese Masked Dance-
Drama . Lewiston/Queenston/Lampeter: The Edwin Mellew Press.
—, 2005b, “Lions, Witches, and Happy Old Men: Some Parallels between Balinese and Japanese 
Ritual Masks,” Asian Theatre Journal  22/2: 227–248.
Damais, L-C., 1964, “Etudes sino-indonésiennes: III. La transcription chinoise Ho-ling comme dési -
gnation de Java,”  Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  52-1, 93–141.
Davidson, R.M., 2002, Indian Esoteric Buddhism. A Social History of the Tantric Movement . New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Davis, R.H., 2000, “Praises of the Drunken Peacocks,” in D.G. White (ed) Tantra in Practice . Prince -
ton and Oxford: Princeton University press, 131–145. 
Dhere, R.C., 1988, “The Gondhali: Singers for the Devi” (trans. Anne Feldhaus), in E. Zelliot and M. 
Berntsen (eds), The Experience of Hinduism: Essays on Religion in Maharashtra . Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 174–89.
—, 1996, Bhāratīya Raṃgbhūmīcyā Śodhāt  (“In search of Indian theatre”). Pune: Padmagandha Pu -
blications. [Online English summary: http://rcdhere.com/Bharatiya_Rangbhoomichya_Shodhat/
SPS-Bharatiya%20Rangbhoomichya%20Shodhat_1.html; accessed 29-07-2013]
Duijker, M., 2010, The Worship of Bhīma; The representations of Bhīma on Java during the Majapahit 
Period.  Amstelveen: EON Pers (PhD Dissertation, Leiden University).
Dunn, D.G., 1983, “Topeng Pajegan: The Mask Dance of Bali.” PhD dissertation. Union Graduate School.
Emigh, J., 1984, “Dealing with the Demonic: Strategies for Containment in Hindu Iconography and 
Performance,” Asian Theatre Journal  1/1: 21–39.
—, 1996, Masked Performance. The Play of Self and Other in Ritual and Theatre . Philadelphia: Uni -
versity of Pennsylvania Press.
Geertz, H., 1994, Images of Power; Balinese Paintings Made for Gregory Bateson and Margaret 
Mead . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Ghosh, Manomohan, 1950, The Nāṭyaśāstra; A Treatise on Hindu Dramaturgy and Histrionics Ascri-
bed to Bharata-Muni. V ol. 1, Calcutta: The Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal. 
Goldman, R.P., 2007, The Rāmāyaṇa Of Vālmīki; An Epic of Ancient India. Vol. 1: Bālakāṇḍa , First 
Indian edition. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. [1984]
Gomperts, A., 2002, “Indian music, the epics and bards in ancient Java,” in Hickmann, E., A.D. 
Kilmer and R. Eichmann (eds.), Studien zur Musikarchäologie III: Archäologie für Klanger -
zeugung und Tonordnung; Musikarchäologie in der Ägäis und Anatolien . Rahden: Verlag 
Marie Leidorf GmbH, 573–596.
Goris, R., 1926, Bijdragen tot de Kennis der Oud-Javaansche en Balineesche Theologie . Leiden: Druk -
kerij A. Vros.

--- [Page 46] ---
Andrea Acri 58
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Goudriaan, T. and Hoykaas, C., 1971, Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava) of Balinese 
Bauddha Brahmans . Amsterdam/London: North Holland Publishing Company.
Hara, M., 1994, “Transfer of merit in Hindu literature and religion,” The Memoirs of the Toyo  Bunko  
25: 103–135.
Hardy, F., 1983, Viraha-Bhakti: The Early History of Kṛṣṇa Devotion in South India.  New Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.
Hart, G., 1987, “Early Evidence for Caste in South India,” in P. Hockings (ed) Dimensions of Social 
Life; Essays in Honor of David G. Mandelbaum . Berlin/New York/Amsterdam: Mouton de Gruy -
ter, 467–491.
Hatley, S., 2013, “What is a Yoginī? Towards a Polythetic Deinition,” in Keul, I. (ed.) “Yoginī” in 
South Asia: Interdisciplinary Approaches . London and New York: Routledge, 21–31.
Headley, S.C., 2004, Durga’ s Mosque. Cosmology, Conversion and Community in Central Javanese 
Islam . Singapore: ISEAS Publications.
Hinzler, H., 1981, Bima Swarga in Balinese Wayang . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Holt, C., 1967, Art in Indonesia; Continuities and Changes . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Hooykaas, C., 1958, “The Paradise on Earth in Lĕṅkā (OJR XXIV 87–126),” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde  114: 264–291.
—, 1966, Sūrya-Sevanā: The Way to God of a Balinese Śiva Priest . Amsterdam: N.V . Noord-Holland -
sche Uitgevers Maatschappij.
—, 1973, Kāma and Kāla. Materials for the study of shadow theatre in Bali . Amsterdam/London: 
North-Holland Publishing Company.
Hunter, T.M. Jr, 2001, “Wṛttasañcaya reconsidered,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  
157: 65–96.
Ingalls, D.H.H., 1962, “Cynics and Pāśupatas: The Seeking of Dishonor ,” Harward Theological Re-
view 55: 281–298.
Iyer, A. cf . Lopez y Royo-Iyer
Jordaan, R.E., “Candi Prambanan; An updated introduction,” in R.E. Jordaan (ed), In praise of Pram-
banan; Dutch essays on the Loro Jonggrang temple complex . Leiden: KITLV Press, 3–115.
Keul, I., 2013, “Introduction: Tracing Yoginīs—religious polysemy in cultural contexts,” in id. (ed), 
“Yoginī”in South Asia: Interdisciplinary Approaches . London: Routledge, 1–18.
Kodi et al., 2005, “Topeng Sidha Karya: A Balinese Mask Dance,” Asian Theatre Journal  22/2: 171–198.
Koppers, W., 1940–1941, “Probleme der indischen Religionsgeschichte,” Anthropos  35/36, 4/6: 761–814.
Krom, N.J. and van Erp, T., 1920,  Beschrĳving van Barabudur , 2 vols. ’s-Gravenhage: Martinus Nĳhoff.
Kunst, J., 1968, Hindu-Javanese Musical Instruments , 2nd revised and enlarged edition. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff. [1927]
—, 1973, Music in Java: Its history, its theory and its technique , 3rd edition, E.L. Heins; 2 vols. The 
Hague: Martinus Nĳhoff. [1949]
Lokesh Chandra, 1997, “Chanda-karaṇa: the art of writing poetry,” in Lokesh Chandra (ed), Cultural 
Horizons of India, Vol. 6. Studies in Tantra and Buddhism, art and archaeology, language and 
literature.  New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture/Aditya Prakashan.
Lopez y Royo-Iyer, A., 1991, “Dance images of ancient Indonesian temples (Hindu/Buddhist ^period): 
the dance reliefs of Borobudur,” Indonesia Circle 56: 3–23.
—, 1998, Prambanan: Sculpture and Dance in Ancient Java; A Study in Dance Iconography . Bangkok: 
White Lotus Press.

--- [Page 47] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 59
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014—, 2003, “Dance in ninth century Java. A methodology for the analysis and reconstitution of the 
dance,” Near Eastern Archaeology  66/3: 137–139.
Lorenzen, D.N., 1991, The Kāpālikas and Kālāmukhas. Two lost Śaivite sects , 2nd edition. Delhi: Moti -
lal Banarsidass [1972].
—, 2000, “A Parody of the Kāpālikas in the Mattavilāsa,” in D.G. White (ed.) Tantra in Practice . Prin -
ceton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 81–96. 
Lunsingh-Scheurleer, P., 2011, “The Berlin Hermit and its Lost Provenance,” Indo-Asiatische Zeits-
chrift ; Mitteilungen der Gesellschaft für indo-asiatische Kunst 15:10–30.
Lutgendorf, P., 1991, The Life of a Text: Performing the Ramcaritmanas of Tulsidas. Berkeley: Uni -
versity of California Press.
Miettinen, J.O., 2008, Dance Images in Temples of Mainland Southeast Asia , Doctoral dissertation. 
Helsinki: Theatre Academy.
Moens, J.L., 1924, “Het Boeddhisme op Java en Sumatra in zijn laatste bloeiperiode,” Tijdschrift van 
de Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen  64:521–579. 
Monier-Williams, M., 1899, Sanskrit-English Dictionary . Oxford: Clarendon Press.
van Naerssen, F.H., 1937, “Twee koperen oorkonden van Balitung in het Koloniaal Instituut te Amster -
dam,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 95: 441–461.
Nihom, M., 1994, Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism; The Kuñjarakarṇadharmakathana 
and the Yogatantra . Wien: Sammlung de Nobili, Institut für Südasien-, Tibet- und Buddhismus -
kunde der Universität Wien.
—, 1997,  “Dīkṣā, Kalā, and the Stuti of Śivarātrikalpa 33.1–2,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde  153:103–111.
Pigeaud, Th., 1938, Javaanse Volksvertoningen: Bijdrage tot de Beschrijving van Land en Volk .Bata -
via: V olkslectuur.
—, 1960–1963, Java in the Fourteenth Century: A Study in Cultural History , 5 vols. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Robson, S., 1995, Deśawarṇana (Nagarakṛtāgama) by Mpu Prapañca.  Leiden: KITLV Press.
Ricklefs, M., 2006, Mystic Synthesis in Java. A History of Islamization from the Fourteenth to the Early 
Nineteenth Centuries . Norwalk: EastBridge.
Rubin, L. and Sedana, I Nyoman, 2007, Performance in Bali . London and New York: Routledge.
Samuel, G., 2006, “The Siddha as a Cultural Category,” in R. Linrothe (ed) Holy Madness: Portraits of 
Tantric Siddhas . New York/Chicago: Rubin Museum of Art/Serindia, 22–33.
Sanderson, A.G.J.S., 1988, “Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions,” in S. Sutherland et al. (eds.) The 
World’ s Religions . London: Routledge, 128–172.
—, 2001, “History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the Pañcarātra and the Buddhist 
Yoginītantras,” in Grimal, F. (ed.), Les sources et le temps. A colloquium. Pondicherry, 11-13 
January 1997 . Pondicherry: IFP-EFEO, 1–47.
—, 2003–2004, “Śaivism among the Khmers; Part I,” Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  
90/91: 349–462.
—, 2006, “The Lākulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate between Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism and 
Āgamic Śaivism,” Indian Philosophical Annual  24 [2003–2005]: 143–217.
—, 2009, “The Śaiva Age—The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period,” 
in S. Einoo (ed.), Genesis and Development of Tantrism . Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 
University of Tokyo, 41–350.
Santoso, S., 1980,  Rāmāyaṇa Kakawin , 3 vols. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.

--- [Page 48] ---
Andrea Acri 60
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014Sarkar, H.B., 1972, Corpus of the inscriptions of Java (Corpus inscriptionum Javanicarum), up to 928 
AD, 2 vols. Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Sedyawati, E., 1982, “The question of Indian inluence on ancient Javanese dance,” Review of Indone-
sian and Malayan Affairs 16/2: 59–82.
Sharrock, P., 2013,  “The Yoginīs of the Bayon,” in Keul, I. (ed.) ‘Yoginī’ in South Asia: Interdiscipli-
nary Approaches . London and New York: Routledge, 117–130.
Smith, D., 1998,  The Dance of Śiva: Religion, Art and Poetry in South India . Cambridge and New 
Delhi: Cambridge University Press.
Soedarsono, 1984, Wayang Wong.  The State Ritual Dance Drama in the Court of Yogyakarta . Yogya -
karta: Gadjah Mada University Press. 
van Stein Callenfels, P.V ., 1926,  Epigraphia Balica , V ol. 1. Weltevreden: G. Kolff.
Stephen, M., 2002, “Returning to original form; A central dynamic in Balinese ritual,” Bijdragen tot de 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  158:  61–94.
Stutterheim, W., 1926, “Schaamplaten in de Hindoe-javaansche kunst,” Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde  66: 671–674.
—, 1956a, “A thousand years old profession in the princely courts on Java,” in id., Studies in Indone-
sian Archaeology . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. [1935], 91–103.
—, 1956b, “An ancient Javanese Bhīma cult,” in id., Studies in Indonesian Archaeology . The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff. [1935], 105–143.
—, 1987,  Rāma-Legends and Rāma-Reliefs in Indonesia . 2 vols. (Translated from German into English 
by G.G. Paliwal and R.P. Jain). New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts/International 
Academy of Indian Culture.
Sumarsam, 1995, Gamelan; Cultural Interaction and Musical Development in Central Java . Chicago 
and London: The University fo Chicago Press.
Supomo, S., 1995, “Indic Transformation: The Sanskritization of Jawa and the Javanization of the Bhara -
ta,” in Bellwood, P., J.J. Fox and D. Tyron (eds), Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspec -
tives. Canberra: Department of Anthropology and Comparative Austronesian Project, RSPS, ANU, 
309–332.
—, 2001, “Some Problems in Writing about Contemporary Life as Depicted in the Sumanasāntaka ,” 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  157:113–129.
Sutton, R.A., 1984, “Who is the Pesindhen? Notes on the Female Singing Tradition in Java,” Indonesia  
37:119–133.
Van der Tuuk, H.N., 1896–1912, Kawi-Balineesch-Nederlandsch woordenboek , 4 vols. Batavia: 
Landsdrukkerij.
Venkataraman, V .V ., 1956, “Skanda cult in South India,” in Bhagavāna Dāsa (ed.), The Cultural Heri-
tage of India , vol. IV . Calcutta: Ramakrishna Mission, 308–313.
Vickers, A., 2011, “The Old Javanese Kapiparwa and a Recent Balinese Painting,” in A. Acri, H. 
Creese and A. Grifiths (eds), From Laṅkā Eastwards.  Leiden: KITLV Press, 119–130.
Wedemeyer, K., 2013, Making Sense of Tantric Buddhism; History, Semiology, and Transgression in 
the Indian Traditions . New York: Columbia University Press.
White, D.G., 1991, Myths of the Dog-Man . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
—, 1997, “Mountains of wisdom: On the interface between Siddha and Vidyādhara cults and the Siddha 
orders in medieval India,” International Journal of Hindu Studies  1:73–95.
—, 2000, “Introduction; Tantra in Practice: Mapping a Tradition,” in  id. (ed), Tantra in Practice . Prin -
ceton/Oxford: Princeton University Press, 3–38. 

--- [Page 49] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 61
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014—, 2005, Review of Ronald M. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism. A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement , in Journal of the International Association of Tibetan 1 (on-line: http://iris.lib.virginia.
edu/tibet/collections/journal/jiats).
Wolff, J.U., 2010, Proto-Austronesian Phonology with Glossary . Ithaca: Cornell Southeast Asia Pro -
gram Publications.
Worsley, P., 2006, “Cosmopolitan Vernacular Culture and Illustrations of the Rāma Story at Caṇ̣i Loro 
Jonggrang, Prambanan. Part 2: The marriage of the crown prince and the succession in polyga -
mous royal households,” in: H. Chambert-Loir and B. Dagens (eds), Anamorphoses; Hommage à 
Jacques Dumarçay . Paris: Les Indes Savantes, 227–239.
Worsley, P. et al., 2013, Mpu Monaguṇa’ s Sumanasāntaka; An Old Javanese Epic Poem, its Indian 
Source and Balinese Illustrations . Leiden/Boston: Brill.
de Zoete, B. and  W. Spies, 1973, Dance and Drama in Bali . Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press 
[London 1938].
Zoetmulder, P.J., 1974, Kalangwan: a survey of Old Javanese Literature . The Hague: M. Nijhoff.
—, 1982, Old Javanese-English Dictionary , (With the collaboration of S.O. Robson). The Hague: M. Nijhoff.

--- [Page 50] ---
Andrea Acri 62
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 1 –  Panel of Chidambaram temple, East Gopura (photo Elisa Ganser 2010).
Fig. 2 – Borobudur, detail of panel III, XXXIII 65 (photo Andrea Acri 2013).

--- [Page 51] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 63
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 3 –  Borobudur, detail of panel I, B b 44 (photo Andrea Acri 2013).
Fig. 4 – Borobudur, detail of panel I, B a 318 (photo Andrea Acri 2013).

--- [Page 52] ---
Andrea Acri 64
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 5 – Borobudur, detail of panel I, a 95 (adapted from Krom and van Erp 1920).
Fig. 6 –  Borobudur, detail of panel O I 20 (photo Andrea Acri 2013).

--- [Page 53] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 65
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 7 –  Borobudur, detail of panel B I, a 233a (adapted from Krom and van Erp 1920).
Fig. 8 –  Borobudur, detail of panel O 39 (adapted from Krom and van Erp 1920).

--- [Page 54] ---
Andrea Acri 66
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 10 – Caṇ̣i Śiva, Prambanan, detail of panel VII.11 cd (photo Roy Jordaan).Fig. 9 –  Caṇ̣i Sari, Prambanan (prob. 9th century AD) 
(photo Kassian Cephas, OD 044446, 
Leiden University Library, Kern Institute).

--- [Page 55] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 67
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 11 –  “The lurahs talèdèk  (chaṇṭang balung ) during a grĕbĕg  (Surakarta)” 
(adapted from Stutterheim 1956, ig. 12).
Fig. 12 –  “The caṇṭang balung s” (adapted from Brandt Buys 1933).

--- [Page 56] ---
Andrea Acri 68
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 13 –  The Caṇṭang balung s performing: “lying,” “clowning,” “ gajah ngombé ” (“drinking elephant”) 
(adapted from Brandt Buys 1933).

--- [Page 57] ---
Birds, Bards, Buffoons and Brahmans 69
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 15 –  “Guru Mani Damodara Chakyar as 
‘Kapali’ in the sacred ritualistic Kutiyattam-
Mattavilasa Prahasana (Mathavilasam) practised 
in very few Hindu temples of Malabar. A very 
rare photo taken from inside Killikkurussi Maha -
deva Temple, Palakkad.” (Photo from Wikipedia 
Commons; Author: reekanthv; Source: From 
author’s private collection; uploaded in 2006.)Fig. 14 –  Balinese Śaiva oficiant (pedanda Śiva) (adapted from 
Hooykaas 1966, detail of Plate 17).

--- [Page 58] ---
Andrea Acri 70
Archipel 88, Paris, 2014
Fig. 16 –  Topeng Sidha Karya during a ritual held at the Bhujangga 
Wesnawa family temple in Banjar Celuk (Desa Dalung, Kabupaten 
Badung, September 2010). Photo courtesy Sugi Lanus, 2010.