--- [Page 1] ---
Chapter 1
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the  
Maritime Silk Routes, 7th–13th Century ad
andrea  acri
In their  introduction  to a recent special issue 
of History of Religions  devoted to (Esoteric) 
‘Buddhist Visual Culture’, Jinah Kim and Rob 
Linrothe ( 2014 ) encouraged ‘a geographically wide 
framing of almost every question that can be asked 
about Esoteric Buddhism’. hey argued:
Yunnan, Java, Japan, and the Tibetan regions of 
the Indian Himalayas can be as important as 
Bodh Gaya, Chang’an, or Lhasa, and an over -
ly narrow focus limits the prospects for fruitful 
comparison. he Ekādaśamukhadh āraṇī, for ex-  
ample, seems to have found purchase from Gan -
dhāra to Nara, Gilgit to Palembang. It is the de -
provincializing and simultaneous decentering of 
any particular locale and any particular type of 
evidence (texts, epigraphical records, or visual 
art) that must occur in order for the study of Eso -
teric Buddhism to generate greater insights. (p. 2)
Espousing an analogous wide-ranging perspec -
tive, this volume studies the genesis, development 
and circulation of Esoteric (or Tantric) Buddhism 
throughout the vast geoenvironmental area that 
may be de ined as ‘Maritime Asia’, from the 7th 
to the 13th centuries ad. In doing so, it upholds 
a trans-regional approach laying emphasis on 
the mobile networks of human agents (‘Masters’), 
textual corpora (‘Texts’), and visual/architectural 
models and artefacts (‘Icons’) through which Eso-
teric Buddhist discourses and practices spread far 
and wide across Asia. his extensive Introduction 
proposes several issues for consideration in survey -
ing recent scholarly literature and in contextual-
izing the religious, historical, and socio-political 
dynamics—intervening on a local/regional as well 
as cosmopolitan/supralocal scale—that shaped 
these networks as they moved across di ferent ge-
ographical and cultural contexts.Maritime Asia, encompassing ‘Monsoon Asia’1 
as its core, spans the eastern littorals of the Indian 
Subcontinent (and their hinterlands) in the west 
to the South China Sea littorals (and their hinter-
lands), the Philippine islands, Korea and Japan in 
the east;2 its geographical fulcrums are the littorals 
of peninsular and mainland Southeast Asia, and 
the Malay-Indonesian Archipelago . Spreading 
across the superimposed geopolitical boundaries 
of modern nation states, and transcending such 
equally arbitrary and historically constructed ge-
ographical divisions as South/Southeast/East Asia, 
this largely maritime expanse was in luenced by 
similar environmental and climatic factors, such 
as the seasonal monsoons. Being the theatre of 
circulation of people, goods, languages and ideas 
through sea routes since time immemorial, Mar-
itime Asia may be theorized as forming—just 
like Eurasia—one interconnected network, and 
arguably even an integral cultural ecumene with 
a shared background of human, intellectual, and 
environmental history. 
During the period that concerns us here, which 
is deined by way of convention as ‘mediaeval’,3 
1. What Reynolds ( 2006 : x) calls the ‘geoenvironmental 
metaphor of Monsoon Asia’ inspired early 20th-centu -
ry French savants, such as Paul Mus, Sylvain Lévi, Jean 
Przyluski, and George Cœdès; see in particular Mus 1933. 
2. Inner continental (North) India and China, Tibet, as 
well as Korea and Japan may be considered as ‘appendices’ 
or ‘edges’ of Monsoon Asia, linked to the sea- and land-
based networks of trade, cultural, and religious exchange 
that collectively shaped Maritime Asia. Similarly, the Eur -
asian continent may be conceptualized as ‘core’, and the 
Mediterranean and North Africa as ‘edges’ (Wang Gun gwu 
in Ooi 2015: 121).
3. his is the widely used periodization referring to the 
post-Gupta period of South Asian history (especiall y as per 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   1 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 2] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 2
Maritime Asia may be conceptualized as a ‘socio-
spatial grouping’ or world region (Lewis and Wigen 
1997) constituted by a pattern of ever-changing rela -
tions dominated by basic underlying a inities. his 
region comprised a web of coastal and inland pol-
ities connected to each other through a network of 
cosmopolitan port- cities across the Bay of Bengal/
Indian Ocean and the South China Sea/Western 
Paciic Ocean, forming a ‘single ocean’  (Wolters 
1999 : 44–45) or, rather, a ‘Two-Ocean Mediterrane -
an’ (Wang Gungwu in Ooi 2015: 57–93). Following 
an increasing recognition of the predominant role 
played by the sea routes (the so-called ‘Maritime 
Silk Roads’)4 in shaping premodern intra-Asian 
connectivity, it seems appropriate to study both 
regional and cosmopolitan manifestations of Es-
oteric Buddhism, not just on their own terms but 
also for their participation in complex circulatory 
processes involving economic/mercantile, diplo-
matic, and religious networks moving across the 
‘Southern Seas’.5
Cutting across the natural boundaries and bar-
riers of continental topography, sea-based routes 
formed a network of conduits that led to the for-
Davidson 2002 ; cf. 2015: 372–73). I extend the application 
of ‘mediaeval’ to the wider area of Maritime Asia, as done 
by Sprengard and Ptak ( 2004 : vii), and also by Wong and 
Heldt (2014 : 16) with respect to China, ‘as a gesture to a 
more global history’; compare Abu-Lughod’s ( 1989) and 
Pollock’s ( 2006 ) application of the term to the Eurasian world.
4. Sen (2014 a: 39) argues that the labels (Maritime/Over-
land) ‘Silk Road(s)/Route(s)’ are misnomers, for ‘S ilk from 
China was neither the earliest nor the most commonly 
traded commodity. he early history of maritime trade 
indicates the prevalence of beads, precious stones, and 
pearls as the main merchandise; during the later periods, 
bulk goods, such as incense, pepper, spices, and porce-
lain dominated the trading activity’ (cf. Whit ield 2007 : 
208–10). However, since the terms ‘Silk Road(s)/Route(s)’ 
have become part of the modern global parlance, I w ill not 
refrain from using them here.
5. Advocating a maritime focus in the study of intra -Asian 
connectivity, Ray ( 2013: 13) rightly notes that ‘though the 
seas have been important for the ive millennia of human 
history, they are also the most glossed over in historical 
discourse, which has tended to focus on predominantly 
land-based national histories’. For a similar criti que against 
a land-based approach in the spread of Buddhism across 
Asia, see Sen ( 2014 a: 40); on the fundamentally interlinked 
nature of overland and maritime routes, see Whit ield 
2007 : 206–8. mation of a mediaeval global Buddhist Asia. he 
Indian Ocean trade network emerged as a ‘largely 
coherent structure, and has been a space which 
served as a huge stratum connecting the various 
kingdoms and cultures adjacent to it, causing inter -
changes in all possible ields and certainly mutual 
inluences’ (Kauz 2010 : 1). By the middle of the 
7th century ad, factors such as a radical expan-
sion of commercial maritime routes connecting 
South with East Asia contributed signi icantly to 
the exchange not only of mercantile goods but also, 
and more importantly, of ideas, beliefs and ritual 
practices, and artistic styles. 
defining  esoteric  buddhism :  
its genesis , and  its relationship  
with  śaivism
Esoteric Buddhism is a phenomenon of enormous 
importance for the religious and cultural history o f 
Asia. Esoteric Buddhism favoured the transmission 
of cults and philosophical ideas, ritual technologi es, 
artistic motifs, material culture, political paradi gms, 
and scienti ic notions across the Buddhist ecumene; 
at the same time, it partook of, and had an impact 
on, the imaginaries and related practices character -
izing the Sanskritic continuum that shaped many 
sociocultural contexts in Maritime Asia and its 
bordering regions from the 7th to the 13th century 
and beyond. Y et its genesis, development and circu -
lation remain poorly understood.6 he very terms 
‘Esoteric/esoteric Buddhism’ and ‘tantric/Tantric 
Buddhism’ (or ‘Tantra’) are still contested,7 and 
none of the emic labels of Mantranaya (‘Method of 
6. Authoritative histories of Esoteric Buddhism are re-
markably few. Recent works focusing mainly on the I ndian 
Subcontinent and Tibet include those by Wedemeyer ( 2013), 
Sanderson ( 2009 , esp. 70–243, which also encompasses 
Southeast Asia, and 1994 ), Davidson ( 2002 ), and Tribe 
(2000 ); cf. also the now classic, yet still seminal, Indo-Ti -
betan Buddhism  by Snellgrove ( 1987). For studies focusing 
on Central and East Asia, see my n. 31.
7. For an overview of the problems and a survey of the 
relevant secondary literature, see especially McBride 2004 ; 
Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 2011: 3–10; Lehnert 2012 : 247, 
n. 2. A promising shi t in focus from the etic terms used 
to describe the traditions to the actual content of ritual 
practice may be found in the text-historical study of early 
Mantranaya  literature by Shinohara ( 2014 ).  
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   2 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 3] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 3
Mantra’), Vajray āna (‘Diamond/ hunderbolt Way’) 
and Mantray āna (‘Way of Mantra’)—though legiti -
mate and attested in primary textual sources—can 
be used as a single catch-all label for the diverse 
array of strands, orientations, and historical trend s 
of Esoteric Buddhism.8 
In dealing with a broad range of Buddhist tradi -
tions over an extensive geographical area and time -
span, this volume adopts the descriptor ‘Esoteric 
Buddhism’ widely employed in contemporary Bud -
dhological scholarship—being fully cognizant of 
the fact that any etic catch-all category unavoidab ly 
entails some level of essentialization and generali-
zation. While this general label in many instances 
may be considered as virtually coterminous with 
‘Tantric Buddhism’,9 it also extends to the whole 
8. Vajrayāna, irst attested in the late 7th century (Tribe 
2000 : 196), refers to a speci ic strand of vajra -centred Man -
tranaya Buddhism, while Mantranaya is a more neutral 
term encompassing a variety of (early) Esoteric Buddhist 
traditions; Mantray āna is a rather late usage ( 11th century 
ad, see de Jong 1984 : 92–93). Kapstein ( 2001 : 236) difer-
entiates the philosophical and exegetical literature on V a-
jrayāna, or ‘the developed Tantrism that becomes promi-
nent only during the last few centuries of Indian Buddhist 
history’, from the practice of mantranaya , ‘as it was con-
ducted in the monastic universities in India during t he mid-
irst millennium’. To Linrothe ( 1999 : 58), the term ‘Tantric 
Buddhism’ ‘may be used to designate within Mah āyāna 
the ritualized use of dhāraṇī and certain imagery shared 
with more developed forms of Esoteric Buddhism’. Or zech 
(2006 a: 148), discussing a Song Buddhist catalogue of ad 
1013, notes that all texts are classi ied as belonging to the 
Hīnayāna, the Mah āyāna, or the ‘esoteric portion of the 
Mahāyāna Scriptural Collection’ ( 大乘經藏秘密部 ); this 
fact suggests that ‘“esoteric” ( 秘密) was a well-understood 
and frequently employed taxonomic term and a distinct 
subdivision within the Mah āyāna’. 
9. I consider the descriptor ‘Tantric Buddhism’, and the 
related adjectives ‘pre-/proto-Tantric’, as legitimate al terna -
tives to ‘Esoteric Buddhism’, for a number of reaso ns. First, 
the word tantra  is irmly established in Buddhism (and 
Śaivism) by the 8th century: for instance, tantra  designates 
texts such as the Susiddhikara  and Vairocanābhisaṁbodhi  
in Sanskritic discourse, and Śāntarakṣita’s Tattvasiddhi  (ca. 
750–80) refers to numerous Buddhist Tantras; moreover, 
many of the beliefs and practices found in the ‘mature’ 
Tantric scriptural corpus had already been around s ince at 
least the 5th century. he unwillingness of many modern 
scholars to adopt this descriptor may re lect a (subcon-
scious) tendency to avoid the label ‘Tantric’ because of its 
(projected) monothetic association with radical, er oticized, gamut of ‘hidden’ or ‘secret’ texts, practices and 
teachings from around the 4th to the 10th century 
and later that characterized certain orientations 
of Mahāyāna Buddhism, especially in East and 
Southeast Asian contexts.
Admittedly, it is oten diicult to reduce or pin 
down Esoteric Buddhism exclusively to speci ic and 
distinct textual corpora, lineages, or ‘schools’, for 
many religious, social and institutional phenom-
ena occurring in lay milieux across the Buddhist, 
Śaiva, Vaiṣṇava, and Jaina divide since the early 
mediaeval period were increasingly dominated by 
Tantric orientations. hese orientations, which were 
not in each and every instance ‘esoteric’, ‘secret’ , or 
initiatory, may include (e.g.) ritual violence, trans-
gressive devotional practices, the use of mantras 
and magical formulas (for both this-worldly and 
other-worldly purposes), sorcery, possession and 
exorcism, and di ferent genres of sacred perfor-
mance. hus, by applying a polythetic approach, 
one may argue that some of the distinctive features 
of elite Esoteric Buddhist milieux penetrated—
through some sort of ‘trickle-down e fect’—the 
extended social fabric; conversely, many ‘popular’ 
cults and practices in luenced high-cultural/textual 
manifestations of Esoteric Buddhism.10
A key area of contention has focused on whether 
there was a clearly de ined and self-consciously 
distinctive stream of Esoteric Buddhism that de-
veloped in the Indian Subcontinent in the irst few 
centuries of the Common Era that preceded the 
more markedly Mantranayic/Vajray ānic develop-
ments from the 7th century onwards.  According to 
and transgressive forms of Buddhism. On the other hand, 
the cognate label ‘Tantric Śaivism’ is widely accepted, even 
to indicate the mainstream, ‘so t core’ currents of the Man -
tramārga, such as the Śaiva Siddh ānta.
10. For instance, the striking similarities shared by  some 
(both premodern and contemporary) ritual dances and 
performances in Tibet and Nepal (i.e., caryānṛtya, bhairab 
naach ), Bali ( topeng pajegan  and the masks Sidha Karya, 
Barong, and Rangda), and Japan ( sanbasō dance and the 
mask Okina) have been ascribed to a common Tantric 
Buddhist source by Coldiron ( 2005 : 240–44) and Emigh 
(1996 ); cf. Acri 2014 . Wedemeyer ( 2013: 257–58, n. 130) con -
siders performances like the caryā dance as the historical 
descendants of earlier Tantric ceremonies dominated 
by the ritual logic and ‘elite ideology’ of esoteri c fringe 
practitioners. 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   3 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 4] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 4
one representative scholarly opinion, Esoteric Bud -
dhism ‘evolved gradually, becoming a distinctive 
stream within the late Mah āyāna closely connected 
with dhāraṇī practice’ (Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 
2011: 6).11 Even though the use of magical formulas 
(dhāraṇī, mantra , vidyā) is not per se a marker of 
Esoteric Buddhism (as these formulas were widely 
used in exoteric, mainstream Buddhist milieux 
for this-worldly purposes), dhāraṇī-practice may 
account for the genesis of early Mantranaya Bud-
dhism within the Mah āyāna, emphasizing as it does 
the eicacy of mantras for soteriological purposes; 
over time, the practice of reciting spells became 
more complex, incorporating elements of image 
worship and visualization (Shinohara 2014 : 194). 
hus, many strands of Esoteric Buddhism may be 
seen as special trends or ‘fashions’ of (esoteric or 
secret, and therefore superior) ritualism, magic 
and meditation, which ‘encompassed a variety of 
diferent sub-movements and doctrinal and ritual 
innovations within (primarily Mah āyāna, or bo-
dhisattva-oriented) Buddhism, beginning in the 
early-mid irst-millennium’ (Wedemeyer 2013 : 
9–10). As such, Mantranaya—as opposed to the 
exoteric P āramitānaya—was o ten perceived as 
an esoteric salvi ic path within the Mah āyāna. Its 
advocates regarded this path as superior, and in 
any event faster and easier, than other Buddhist 
paths. 
11. Prior to the development of a self-conscious esoteric 
Mahāyāna movement distinct from the exoteric Mah āyā-
na, the dhāraṇī-texts that were translated into Chinese 
from the 4th century onward formed the matrix out of 
which the Vidy ādhara Collection ( Chimingzhou zang 持明
咒藏 ; Vidyādharapiṭaka) was compiled during the mid- 7th 
century (see Gray 2009 : 2–3, Davidson 2002 : 24, and the 
seminal study by Hodge, 1992 ; cf. Shinohara 2014 ). he 
Vidyādharapiṭaka itself was perceived as the precursor of 
later extensive Tantric collections such as the Vajraśekhara/
Māyājāla (see Dalton 2005 : 122). hese prototypical esoteric 
varieties of Buddhism may already have been in existence 
by the 5th and 6th centuries, as suggested among other 
things by the iconography of early cultic sites in Maha-
rashtra. Early Śaiva (proto-)Tantric scriptures, such as the 
core of the Niśvāsatattvasa ṁhitā (prob. ad 450–550), attest  
to the same stock of beliefs and practices— vetāla-rituals, 
possession, initiation, and the acquisition of supernatur al 
powers through mantras, elixirs, or magical procedures—
that are also found in slightly later Buddhist texts, such as 
the Mañjuśriyamūlakalpa.A distinguishing feature of mediaeval Esoteric 
Buddhism was initiation ( abhiṣeka). he practition -
ers of this path—both monastic and lay—under-
went an initiation ceremony bestowed by a master 
in order to pursue a fast process of liberation, or 
fulill mundane goals, with the assistance of psy-
cho-physical techniques ( sādhana , upāya) such 
as yogic meditation and visualization, maṇḍalas, 
mantras, magico-ritual procedures, and worship of 
(Esoteric) Buddhist icons. Esoteric Buddhism, and 
especially the Vajray āna strand, had in its central 
practices and discourses an element of initiation b y 
a vajrācārya, transgression, empowerment, divin-
ization, worship of wrathful deities, and secrecy.12
Esoteric Buddhism shared signi icant common 
elements with Tantric Śaivism, to the extent that 
the two religions participated in an interdepend-
ence of discourse in such disparate domains as 
philosophy, soteriology, ritual, and iconography. 
his complex phenomenon of dialectic in luence 
and interchange has triggered a wide range of etic 
interpretations. While the formative phase of the 
non-dual and transgressive Vajray āna Buddhism 
and its foundational texts (labeled Yoganirut-
taratantras in the Tibetan tradition) is still a ma tter 
of debate as only a fraction of ‘proto-Tantric’ Bud-
dhist (and Śaiva) textual corpora have survived for 
us, scholars generally agree on the view that the 
whole canon was the result of a synthesis with a 
corpus of Sanskrit texts of antinomian character 
called Yogin ītantras or Ḍākinītantras, which began 
to appear in South Asia by the 7th or 8th century. 
Sanderson ( 1994 , 2001 ), hypothesizing a direct in-
luence from Śaiva milieux of the Mantram ārga 
(‘Way of Mantra’) where mantra-related salvi ic 
and/or mundane practices rose to prominence 
during the 6th and 7th centuries, argues that the 
Yoginītantras were originally of Śaiva persuasion, 
and relected the transgressive rhetoric and prac-
tices of such marginal groups as the K āpālikas, the 
ash-smeared, skull-bearing devotees of the terri-
fying Bhairava/Mah ākāla. Conversely, Davidson 
(2002 ) maintains that in the early siddha  milieux 
of composition and circulation of such corpora 
the boundaries between Buddhism and Śaivism 
12. For a description of ‘eight signi icant features of 
Tantric Buddhism’, see Tribe 2000 : 197–202.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   4 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 5] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 5
were not clear-cut, and the vectors were subaltern 
individuals or (tribal) ethnic groups living at the 
margins of the Brahmanical social order. Another 
position, advocated by Seyfort Ruegg ( 1964 , 2008 ), 
posits an early ‘pan-Indian religious substratum’ 
or common cultic stock that would ex hypothesi 
form the endogenous common source and cultural 
background from which both Śaiva and Buddhist 
traditions derived, and to which they ultimately 
owe their shared common elements. 
consolidation  and  spread  of  
esoteric  buddhism : ‘royal ’ vs. ‘mer -
cantile ’ paradigms
A widespread scholarly opinion views the develop-
ment of Esoteric Buddhism as an eminently royal 
afair. According to Ronald Davidson ( 2002 : 23), 
one of the main exponents of this paradigm, ‘eso-
teric Buddhism has a very strong political element 
which is occluded in the modern Buddhist apologia’. 
To Dav idson, Esoteric Buddhist ideology, even the 
monastic one, is a mirror of Indian mediaeval life 
(2002 : 115):
When the Mantray āna becomes culturally im-
portant outside India, it is principally through 
the agency of o icial patronage, either aristo-
cratic or imperial. Given these circumstances, 
it would be extraordinary if the military and 
political culture of early medieval India had 
not shaped esoteric institutions, doctrines, 
literature, rituals, and iconography, at least 
to some degree.… Esoteric Buddhism is the 
form of medieval Buddhism that internalized, 
appropriated, rea irmed, and rearranged the 
structures most closely associated with the sys-
tems of power relations, ritual authentication, 
aesthetics, gi t-giving, clan associations, and 
sense of dominion that de ined post-Gupta In-
dian polities.
According to Davidson, what ensured the con-
solidation and expansion of Esoteric Buddhism was 
its alignment to state interests, e fected through 
monastic agents who entered the royal courts and 
secured the support of the elites, o ten competing 
with the ritual specialists of what was the most 
popular religion and ritual technology of their 
time over large portions of South and Southeast Asia: Śaivism. hus, the relationship between Es-
oteric Buddhist ritual specialists and royal elites 
seems to be coterminous with one that existed 
between Brahmanical purohita s and the courts 
they served .13 
By acting as royal chaplains, religious precep-
tors ( rājaguru ), subduers of demons,14 magicians, 
thaumaturges, and even courtly advisors, Buddhist 
monks whose ritual practice adhered to ‘esoteric’ 
traditions provided warring monarchs with rituals 
geared towards the obtainment of what was most 
sought ater by them: power. hrough the invoca-
tion of powerful entities, the pro fering of mantras 
and spells, and the enactment of royal initiations, 
those masters promised kings the safeguarding 
of their kingdoms, victory against their enemies, 
invincibility in battle,15 and indeed divinization of 
their body (see Flood 2006 : 11). White ( 2012 : 165) 
captures the translocal dynamics involved in this 
process by noting that besides trade, warfare, and 
political expansion, the contacts and exchanges 
favouring the spread of (Indic) adstratal Esoteric 
Buddhist (and Tantric Śaiva) traditions took place 
at the hands of religious and magico-ritual spe-
13. Linguistic evidence supporting this inextricable con-
nection between politics and religious/ritual ideology is 
provided by the use of terms pertaining to the ritu al sphere 
in the mediaeval Indic political domain (and vice versa), 
such as the important terms maṇḍala or mantrin  (‘pos -
sessor of [secret] spells’: Davidson 2002 : 143–44); the latter, 
indicating the king’s counselors, has remained in use in 
modern Hindi, Indonesian, and Malay with the meaning 
of ‘minister [of state]’ (compare the Chinese and English 
‘mandarin’: see Strickmann  1996 ). 
14. On the importance of demonology and ‘exorcism’ as 
vectors of transregional transfer and adoption of Budd hism 
(and Śaivism), see Strickmann 1996 : 149, White 2012 : 150, 
and Giebel, this volume.
15. To be sure, the employment of monks in warfare is 
not exclusive to this period: witness the Chinese military 
campaigns that started in the 4th century (Sen 2003 : 36). 
However, the Esoteric Buddhist signature of the martial 
rituals carried out by Amoghavajra at the Tang court is 
miles apart from the ‘true Buddhism’ claimed by Xuan-
zang, who turned down an o fer by Emperor Taizong to 
accompany him in his Korean campaign (ibid.: 37). Much 
has been written on the topic of ‘war magic’ and Esoteric 
Buddhism in India and beyond (besides the contribut ions 
by Acri, Bade and Goble in this volume, see Sinclair 2014 , 
White 2012 , Sanderson 2004 , Davidson 2002 , and Lokesh 
Chandra 1992 a, 1992 b).
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   5 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 6] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 6
cialists enjoying royal or imperial patronage—‘a 
prime example being the battle ield sorcerers whose 
magical devices and counter-devices were con-
sidered to be choice weapons in battle’. hrough 
rituals, whether internalized or enacted, these 
agents ofered the courtly elites an easy path to the 
mainstream Buddhist ideal of personal salvation on 
the one hand, and to the Tantric ideal of diviniza-
tion on the other. By the same token, they ensured 
a broader support for their cause by providing lay 
householders with equally powerful means—ritual, 
magical, meditative, and devotional—to achieve 
both their mundane and supramundane goals. 
An alternative view lays emphasis on traders—
who were among the original propagators of Bud-
dhism in its early stage—as the main agents of 
the dissemination of ‘Maritime Buddhism’ across 
Asia (see, e.g., Bopearachchi 2014 , Dayalan 2013, 
Lancaster n.d.).16 While the success of Buddhism 
(in both its exoteric and esoteric forms) overseas 
has been too o ten simplistically perceived as the 
unique result of economic and social forces con-
nected to a mercantile class-ideology, characterized 
by an inherent dynamism and opposed to a ‘static’ 
Brahmanism, it is undeniable that lay householders 
active in trade, cra ts, and warfare played a role in 
patronizing and spreading—e.g., through pilgrim-
age, travel, or migration— Esoteric Buddhist cults.17 
Hiram Woodward, criticizing Davidson’s model for 
failing to make a place for the ‘link’ between courts  
and monasteries on the one hand, and between 
monasteries and society at large on the other ( 2004 : 
332), questions Davidson’s assumption that ‘a factor 
in the rise of the Mantray āna or of institutional 
esoterism … was the loss of mercantile support 
and the rise in o icial patronage’ ( 2004 : 353; cf. 
Davidson 2002 : 82–83, 167). Trying to bridge the 
gap between the ‘royal’ and ‘mercantile’ model, 
Woodward rightly argues that 
16. By contrast, Sen ( 2014 a: 42–43) discusses evidence of 
‘antagonistic encounters’ between Buddhist monks and 
(Hindu?) merchants plying the overland and maritime 
commercial routes.
17. See Szántó 2012 : 34–35 on the readership of the Ca-
tuṣpīṭhatantra , and his n. 47 for a summary of P āla evidence 
of Buddhist patronage by members of the above-menti oned 
social groups; cf. Mishra 2011 on the ‘vertical’ spread of 
Vajrayāna in mediaeval Odisha (formerly: Orissa). the turn to Mantray āna in Java in the 780s and 
790s is hard to square with such a notion, as 
is ninth-century Southeast Asian support for 
a monastery in N ālandā. Only merchant net-
works could have sustained the contacts with 
Bengal and Sri Lanka that made possible the 
movement of monks and the transfer of texts. 
It is hard to see why the territorial and defen-
sive aspects of the Mantray āna, so connected 
in Davidson’s mind with o icial patronage, 
need be thought incompatible with merchant 
values. Indeed, bonds among merchants in 
widely separated ports could well have been 
enhanced by beliefs in secret codes, despite dif-
ferences in language and ethnicity, much as a 
cluster of mandalas exhibits alternate paths to 
a single uni ied goal.
Recent scholarship has unveiled the multi-direc-
tional connections existing between Buddhist 
centres, tied to each other by overlapping networks 
of relations that were religious as much as economi c, 
diplomatic, and political in nature.18 herefore, to 
understand the establishment (and disruption) of 
complex networks, an eclectic, rather than ‘single 
model’, approach is required. To better grasp such 
a multifaceted, trans-regional phenomenon as the 
patterns of Buddhist transmission across Maritime 
Asia, which was shaped by socio-political, econom -
ic, and perhaps even environmental factors, one 
may try to apply, as was done by Neelis ( 2011: 10) 
with respect to South, Central, and East Asia, a 
‘networks approach’ or ‘networks model’. As Neelis 
(2011: 319) persuasively puts it:
Multidirectional movement by agents of Bud-
dhist transmission … who selectively le t 
traces of their journeys in literary texts, in-
scriptions, and material artifacts indicates 
more complex patterns of transmission than 
an oversimpli ied low of inluence in a single 
direction along a ixed route. As they consol-
idated multifaceted links between religious, 
economic, and political nodes along multiple 
18. On the intersection between trade, diplomacy, the 
emergent Esoteric Buddhist networks in the 7th century, 
and their integration in the wider Asian Buddhist w orld in 
the 8th century, see Sen 2003 ; cf. Hall 2010  on the (inter-)
regional trade networks of insular Southeast Asia  in the 9th 
and 10th centuries, in the light of archaeological evidence 
from shipwrecks and epigraphy.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   6 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 7] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 7
lines of communication, they formed their 
own parallel exchange networks, thus enhanc-
ing possibilities for cross-cultural contact and 
transfer.… It remains to be seen if trade net-
works played comparative roles as catalysts for 
long-distance transmission in other Buddhist 
geographical and historical contexts that were 
beyond the scope of this inquiry: Sri Lanka 
and Southeast Asia.
his approach individuates the nodes, conduits, 
and hubs that facilitated the dynamic processes 
of exchange, thus going beyond the metaphors of 
cultural ‘lows’ and ‘in luences’ that have so far 
characterized the scholarly discourse. To fully 
appreciate how religious, mercantile, and diplo-
matic networks acted as catalysts for transmission 
of Esoteric Buddhism far and wide across Asia, it 
is necessary to adopt a geographically wider ‘Mar-
itime Asian’ perspective, and take into account the 
maritime vectors linking together the nodal centres 
in the Buddhist ecumene.
placing  esoteric  buddhism  in  
mediaeval  maritime  asia
As is shown by scriptural, epigraphic, and art 
historical materials, esoteric cults, doctrines , and 
ritual technologies lourished across the mediae-
val Buddhist ecumene. Vajra -accoutrements, icons 
of Esoteric Buddhist deities, and dhāraṇīs based 
on Esoteric Buddhist texts in Sanskrit have been 
recovered across a vast swathe of both the conti-
nental landmass and island territory of Maritime 
Asia.19 Networks of Buddhist clerics of di ferent 
ethnicities adhering to novel Tantric developments 
began to emerge in the 7th century in disparate 
locales, moving along the maritime routes con-
necting South, East, and Southeast Asia . hose 
sea routes, established over the centuries—if not 
millennia—by a steady low of traders and seafarers, 
19. Evidence from insular areas, which is rarely acco unted 
for in studies on Esoteric Buddhism, has been found in 
Sri Lanka (see Mudiyanse 1967 ; Chandawimala 2013), the 
Maldives (see Gippert 2004 , 2005 ), the Indonesian Archi-
pelago (see Nihom 1994 , 1998 a; Sundberg 2003 ; Kandahjaya 
2009 , this volume; Gri iths 2011b, 2012 , 2014 a, 2014 b, 2014 c; 
Griiths, Revire and Sanyal 2013; Cruijsen, Gri iths and 
Klokke 2012 ; Long 2014 ; Hall 2010 ; Miksic, this volume), 
and the Philippines (see Orlina 2012 ).were also plied by pilgrims and religious specialists  
who crossed oceans and lands in search of esoter-
ic knowledge, rare Sanskrit scriptures, relics and 
icons, powerful spells, and rituals of ma ṇḍalic in-
itiation ( abhiṣeka) imparted by renowned ācāryas, 
as well as in search of political sponsors.
Esoteric Buddhism coexisted in many contexts 
with varieties of mainstream exoteric Mah āyāna 
or Pali Buddhism(s). Gaining momentum in the 
8th century, in what could indeed be described 
as a ‘Tantric turn’, it eventually became a nearly 
pan-Asian phenomenon. Its expansion was ini-
tially driven by a handful of exceptional masters 
endowed with a remarkably cosmopolitan vision 
and ‘international’ ambitions, who gained the 
support of the ruling elites of their time. Kings w ho 
either sponsored or granted direct recognition as 
state religion to Esoteric Buddhism during its ‘ irst 
wave’20 of pan-Asian expansion belonged to such 
prominent, and roughly coeval, Asian dynasties 
as the early Candras (r. ca.  850–1050) and Pālas (r. 
ca. 750–1199) in the northeastern Indian Subcon-
tinent, and the early Bhauma-Karas in Odisha (r. 
ca. 825–950); the Yarlung dynasty in Tibet (r. ca. 
618–842); the early Second Lambaka ṇṇas in Sri 
Lanka (from the late 7th to the mid- 9th century, 
up to Sena I); the Śailendras and cognate Śrīvijayan 
rulers in Java, Sumatra, and the Malay Peninsula 
(r. ca. 7th–13th centuries);21 the Chinese Tangs (r. 
20. Linrothe ( 1999 ) has elaborated a schematic model en-
compassing three phases of Esoteric Buddhism on the  basis 
of the iconographical and doctrinal developments ca rried 
by each one of them. While pointing out that some of the 
stages ater the 8th century may be contemporaneous and 
contiguous, he argues that ‘Phase One dominates the  period 
between the late sixth to the eighth centuries, Phase Two 
presides from roughly the eighth to the late tenth century 
and Phase hree from the late tenth century through to 
the twelth’ (ibid.: 13). Although this model may retain its 
usefulness when analysing wider-ranging historical or 
soteriological aspects of Esoteric Buddhism, here I would 
rather use the term ‘wave’ as a metaphor for the spread of 
esoteric fashions far and wide across Asia, and iden tify two 
main waves: the irst from around the 7th to the early 10th 
century, the second from around the late 10th to the 13th 
century. Each of these waves appears to have been char -
acterized by new religious networks, socio-political con -
igurations, scriptural canons, and iconographic fashions .
21. he issue as to whether the Śailendra Buddhist kings 
belonged to a distinct dynasty—of either Javanese, South-
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   7 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 8] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 8
618–907), especially under Emperors Xuanzong 
(r. 712–56) and Daizong (r. 762–79); the later Silla 
dynasty in Korea (r. 661–935); and the Japanese 
imperial dynasty in the Heian period (r. 794–1185). 
Having su fered a sudden decline in royal support, 
if not outright persecution, in locales as disparate 
as Tibet, Sri Lanka, Central Java, and China in the 
middle of the 9th century,22 Esoteric Buddhism 
picked up momentum again in the 11th century 
(the ‘second wave’) and remained vital through 
the 12th and 13th centuries across much of Mari-
time Asia. Major royal igures of that period who 
elected Esoteric Buddhism as their personal and 
oicial cult, or supported Tantric rituals as a means 
of achieving their political ends, are Jayavarman 
VII in Cambodia (r. ca. 1181–1220 ), Kṛtanagara in 
East Java (r. 1268 –92), and Kublai Khan in China (r. 
1260 –94). Having virtually died out in the Indian 
Subcontinent by the late 13th century, it continued 
to live or even thrive—in its localized adaptations—
until the 15th century in Java and Sumatra (e.g., 
under King Ādityavarman, r. ?– 1375), and to the 
present day in Nepal, Tibet, Bali, and Japan.
Early, if rare, Esoteric Buddhist vestiges are 
found in Western India, as evidenced e.g. by im
east Asian, or even South Asian origin—that reigned  in Java 
up to ca. ad 850, and was followed by a Javanese line of 
Śaiva kings, has been the object of a longstanding contro-
versy among scholars; among the supporters of a dual-dy-
nasty theory are Jordaan ( 2006 , and Jordaan and Colless 
2009 ) and Long ( 2014 ), while Sundberg ( 2011, this volume), 
along with the majority of archaeologists and historians 
of premoden Java, opt for a single-dynasty theory. As this 
introduction is not the right place to discuss this complex 
issue in detail, su ice it to say that in Java from the mid- 9th 
century we note a prevalence of royal support for Śaivism 
instead of Buddhism, and no more mentions of Śailendra 
monarchs, whereas in Sumatra Buddhism continues to 
thrive, and we ind references to ‘ Śailendra’ monarchs and 
a ‘Śrīvijaya’ polity. For a useful survey of the literatu re, and 
a balanced approach favouring a ‘Javanese multi-dyna stic’ 
model, see Zakharov 2012 .
22. Apart from socio-political contingencies, such par -
adigm-shi ts may have occurred as the result of religious 
‘reforms’ that promoted a turn towards non-Esoteric va-
rieties of Buddhist traditions (as happened, e.g., in Sri 
Lanka [see Sundberg, this volume] and, at a later d ate, 
in Myanmar and Cambodia with respect to the preva -
lence of heravāda/Pali Buddhism over Mah āyāna and 
Vajrayāna) or even di ferent religions (as happened, e.g., 
in Central Java). ag ery from Buddhist caves in the Western Dec
can, such as Ellor ā (Malandra 1996 ), Aurangabad 
(Brancaccio 2010 ) and Kānherī, where Tārās and 
(esoteric) Avalokite śvaras are found as early as the 
6th–7th centuries (Pandit 2015; Bopearachchi 2014 : 
164–67).23 By the 9th century, a Buddhist monastery 
hosting a famous caitya  and a Tārā temple was 
located in Mah ābimba in Ko ṅkana (the Konkan 
coast of western India); the well-known illustrated 
Nepalese manuscript of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Pra -
jñāpāramitā dated ad 1015 (CUL ms. Add. 1643, f. 
193r), presenting a visual documentation of divin-
ities and renowned centres across Buddhist Asia, 
mentions Mah āviśva (a corruption of Mah ābimba?) 
as the seat of a famous Lokan ātha (cf. below, n. 57; 
Szántó 2016 : 2), and links a signi icant number of 
other Buddhist sites to Ko ṅkana (see Kim 2014 : 48). 
It is generally acknowledged that major centres 
of Esoteric Buddhism (and of Tantrism in general) 
were found in the northeastern areas of the Indian 
Subcontinent, roughly corresponding to modern 
Bihar (itself the cradle of Buddhism since the time 
of the Buddha), West Bengal, and Bangladesh. Bihar 
was the seat of such prestigious institutions of Bud -
dhist learning as N ālandā, Vikrama śīla, Somapura, 
and Udda ṇḍapura (Otantapur ī), where esoteric 
fashions seem to have become popular from the late 
8th through the 12th century;24 the whole northeast -
ern region hosted major masters of Mantranaya and 
Vajrayāna Buddhism, and several Tantric works 
stem from there. 
 It is now increasingly recognised that Odisha 
(Oḍra) played a signi icant role in the formation 
of Esoteric Buddhism and its spread to Southeast 
Asia. his region, part of which was formerly known 
across the Indic world as ‘Kali ṅga’, boasted impor-
tant monastic centres and sacred pilgrimage sites, 
such as Ratnagiri, Udayagiri, and Lalitagiri, which 
were connected to the maritime networks via the 
23. Malandra ( 1993: 116) has noted a similarity between 
the depiction of the eight Bodhisattvas on the exterior 
of the Central Javanese Candi Mendut and some of the 
Ellorā caves; a possible iconographical in luence stemming 
from Ellor ā on the sculpted triptych of Mendut has been 
hypothesized by Revire ( 2015a).
24. On the P āla-sponsored monasteries as centres of 
Tantrism, see Saran 1981, Tanaka 2008 , Sanderson 2009 : 
87–108, Delhey 2015: 4, Decleer n.d.: 15–16. 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   8 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 9] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 9
ports of Kali ṅgapatana and Puri.25 An evocative 
locale in the pan-Asian Tantric world across the 
Bauddha- Śaiva divide was Śrīśailam/Śrīparvata 
in Andhra Pradesh.26 Some have identi ied this as 
the ‘Vajraparvata’ mentioned in the 14th-century 
Sri Lankan chronicle Nikāyasaṅgraha  as a seat 
of the heretic V ājiriyavāda and N īlapaṭadarśana 
monks who introduced varieties of Tantric Bud-
dhism on the island in the 9th century, while others 
have linked it to the early Buddhist site of N āgār-
junakoṇḍa—another source of Mah āyāna and 
perhaps also Tantric cults.27 his area, connected 
25. See Malandra 1996 : 186 n. 12, 204; Sadakata 1997; Don -
aldson 2001 ; Ray 2008 : 130–33; Sanderson 2009 : 80–83; 
Mishra 2011; Reichle, this volume. Szántó ( 2016 : 4)  reports 
that the Saṁvarodayā —the to date only surviving initiation 
manual of the Saṁvara  cycle, copied on a Nepalese ms. 
dated 1054  ad—was written by a certain Bh ūvācārya at 
Ratnagiri. On the important role of Odisha in the spread 
of (Esoteric) Buddhism overseas, see Patra 2013, several 
papers in Patnaik 2014 , and Tanaka 2014 , who describes 
some dhāraṇīs unearthed at Udayagiri II that have not 
been found anywhere else in India, but versions of which 
are extant in Sri Lanka, Tibet, China and Japan (the same 
documents provide evidence of the connection between 
Śubhākaradeva of the Bhauma-Kara dynasty and Uda-
yagiri). On the hypothesis (now largely abandoned) of a 
connection between the Javanese Śailendras and Indian 
dynasties, such as the Śailodbhavas of 7th-century Odisha 
or the Ikṣvākus of Śrīśailam/Śrīparvata of Andhra, see  
Majumdar 1937; Sarkar 1985a, 1985b; Lokesh Chandra 
1995a. On the identi ication of the Tantric seat of O ḍḍiyāna 
with Odisha (rather than the Swat valley), see Donaldson 
1995: 174, 2001 : 8–16. On the possible in luence of Tantric 
practices from Odisha on the demonic igures of Balinese 
dance-drama, see Emigh 1996 . 
26. See Yamano 2009  and White 1996 : 60–61, 110–12. 
White discusses the close associations of Śrīśailam/Śrīpar-
vata with the siddha s and esoteric/alchemical traditions 
(including those stemming from N āgārjuna) in both Bud-
dhist and Śaiva lore, and points out that there may have 
been two separate toponyms—the one being in the Kur nool 
district of the central Deccan plateau, the other one sixty 
miles to the east, near N āgārjunakoṇḍa (White 1996 : 375, 
n. 47, referring to an earlier work by Arion Ro şu). On the 
esoteric features of some early Buddhist sites in Andhra, 
see Ray 2008 : 128–30.
27. Lokesh Chandra ( 1993 a: 500) links Śrīparvata to 
Vajraparvata on the grounds of the former’s close asso-
ciation with Vajray āna. On the introduction of Esoteric 
Buddhism in Sri Lanka by a monk of the Vajraparvata 
ordination lineage ( vajraparvvata-nik āyavāsīvū bhikṣu), 
and its adoption by Matvalasen (i.e., King Sena I, r . 834–54), to the important seaport of Vi śakhapatnam, was ‘a 
launching point for missionaries to Kashmir, China, 
Bengal, and Sri Lanka’ (White 1996 : 60).
Other South Asian locales that are at present 
not commonly associated with Buddhism, such 
as the prevalently Śaiva South India (K āñcī and 
Nākappaṭṭiṉam in Tamil Nadu in particular),28 
or that are now associated with heravāda/Pali 
Buddhism, such as Sri Lanka,29 are also being 
recognised as prominent centres—if not cradles, 
indeed—of Esoteric Buddhist activities in the 
early mediaeval period. Scholarly investigations 
of archaeological remains con irm the information, 
found in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese textual 
sources, that both South India and Sri Lanka once 
hosted important lineages of Esoteric Buddhist 
masters and repositories of Tantras, and acted as 
hubs for the spread of esoteric traditions to South-
east Asia and beyond. Foundational scriptures, such 
as the Mahāvairocanatantra  and Sarvatath āga-
ta tattvasaṅgraha , may have been compiled there 
(Hodge 2003 : 11–12). According to Esoteric Buddhist 
hagiography, N āgārjuna—one of the Mah āsiddhas 
oten associated with South India in mediaeval 
Sanskrit sources—received his revealed texts from 
Vajrasattva in an iron stūpa, and later transmitted 
them to N āgabodhi (a.k.a. N āgabuddhi; see Ap-
see Sankrityayana 1934: 214–16; Mudiyanse 1967: 9; Lokesh 
Chandra 1993a and 1993b: 118–26; Sundberg and Giebel 
2011: 215, n. 168; Chandawimala 2013: 117. Interestingly, the 
Nikāyasaṅgraha  contains a list of early Esoteric Buddhist 
scriptures followed by the Vajraparvata-dwelling monks, 
such as the seminal Sarvatath āgatatattvasa ṅgraha , Māyā-
jāla, Paramādya, Cakra  śaṁvara , etc. (Lokesh Chandra 
1993b: 125; ). 
28. Lokesh Chandra ( 1993a: 500–502) has stressed the 
importance of K āñcī—which he connects to O ḍḍiyāna—for 
overseas (and especially insular Southeast Asian) Esot eric 
Buddhism (see also Guy 2004  and, on Buddhism in Tamil 
Nadu, Monius 2001 ). 
29. Although Sri Lanka was one of the early recipient s and 
exporters of heravāda/Pali Buddhism, recent studies have 
underlined the numerous vestiges of both Mah āyāna and 
Esoteric Buddhism existing on the island. hese includes 
images of Vajrasattva and T ārā, sealings with Vajray āna 
elements, the fragments of Ratnakūṭa Sūtra found in the 
Ceṭiyagiri Monastery, the Dhāraṇīghara mentioned in the 
Mahāvaṁsa, the dhāraṇīs from Abhayagiri and those found 
in the Great Book of Protection (see Mudiyanse 1967; Sund -
berg 2004 ; Sundberg and Giebel 2011; Chandawimala 2013). 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   9 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 10] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 10
pendix A) in South India (Orzech 1995); monks of 
the caliber of Pu ṇyodaya, Amoghavajra and Prajña 
travelled from China to South India and/or Sri 
Lanka to get hold of some rare esoteric texts and 
receive initiation from local consecration masters.
Many of the Southeast and East Asian locales re -
ceived their Buddhism(s) via high-pro ile diplomat -
ic and commercial contacts entertained with South 
Asian entrepôts that doubled as centres of Bud-
dhist difusion. In these cosmopolitan entrepôts, 
Buddhism coexisted alongside Śaivism, being 
either sponsored, or at least benignly tolerated, by 
predominantly Śaiva dynasties.30 hese strategic 
crossroads of mercantile and political power con-
stituted the ‘nodes’ that probably played a crucial 
role in the genesis and development of Buddhism in 
general, and Tantric traditions in particular, insofar 
that they supported prestigious centres of learning, 
sponsored monastic congregations and institutions, 
or housed ancient relics visited by pilgrims coming 
from all over the Indic world. hink, for instance, 
of Nālandā and Vikrama śīla in northeastern India, 
Abhayagirivih āra at Anur ādhapura in Sri Lanka, 
the Buddhist institutions of higher learning in 
Sumatra alluded to by Yijing, and the Buddhist 
monumental complexes of Central Java. 
30. Such as the Pallavas in the Tamil country, who did 
not oppose Buddhism. Gillet ( 2013: 115) argues that Bud-
dhism played a major role in the construction of Pallava 
iconography through dynamics of assimilation, yet the 
alleged ‘silence’ of this dynasty regarding Buddhism ulti-
mately suggests a counter-acting strategy through inclu-
sion. Singh ( 2014 : 56) regards this attitude as an ‘incor-
porative kingship within a polytheistic or monolatrous 
context’ dictated by reasons of realpolitik. For instance, 
the Pallava may have acted out of diplomatic politeness 
when dealing with other Buddhist powers, as suggested 
by the protection enjoyed by Vajrabodhi in K āñcī, and by 
their religio-diplomatic links with contemporary pro- Bud-
dhist dynasties such as the Tangs, the Śailendras, and the 
Lambaka ṇṇas. Around ad 1019 a Buddhist temple, the 
Śailendra-C ūḍāmaṇivarmavih āra, was founded at N ākap-
paṭṭiṉam by Cūḍāmaṇivarman, king of Ka ṭāha (Kedah in 
the Malay Peninsula), with the support of staunch Śaiva 
King Rājarāja Cōḻa I. In a similar fashion, the P ālas were 
early adopters of Mah āyāna Buddhism and its Mantra-
naya and Vajray āna developments, but at the same time 
patronized Śaivism, especially in its Atim ārga branch (see 
Sanderson 2009 : 87–88, 108–15; Bagchi 1993: 13; Davidson 
2002 : 85).the place  of southeast  asia  in the 
esoteric  buddhist  ecumene
A series of recent, monumental works on Esoteric 
Buddhism in South, Central, and East Asia has 
dramatically improved our knowledge of these 
traditions in their regional contexts, and laid out 
the basis for an exploration of the connections—
mostly across the overland Silk Roads—that linked 
the opposite ends of the Eurasian landmass.31 Yet 
scholarship needs to move beyond the paradigm 
envisaging a ‘di fusionist’ spread of Esoteric Bud-
dhism from a South Asian ‘heartland’ or ‘mother-
land’ to East and Southeast Asian ‘peripheries’, for 
cults were transmitted from multiple centres, and 
by no means followed a mono-directional pattern. 
According to Sen ( 2003 : 11), during the Tang period 
Chinese Buddhist monks ceased to su fer from a 
‘borderland complex’: hence, China ceased  to be 
a ‘frontier’ and became a terminus, and centre of 
difusion, of Buddhism in its own right.32 Similar -
ly, Skilling ( 2009 : 42) re-evaluates the important 
participation of premodern Siam in a much wider 
world of Buddhist cultural interchange than is 
usually assumed at present, questioning ‘whether 
‘‘India’’ should always be the ‘‘centre’’, Siam the 
periphery—a passive recipient of ‘‘in luence’’’.
Southeast Asia—and large areas of what are now 
the Malay peninsula and the Indonesian Archipel-
ago in particular—played an important, Asia-wide 
role as both a crossroads and terminus of Buddhist 
31. See, e.g., Kapstein and van Schaik 2010 , Dalton 2011, 
Meinert 2016  (Central Asia and Tibet); McRae and Nattier 
2012  (India, Central Asia and China); Orzech, Sørensen 
and Payne 2011 (East Asia).
32. For instance, while the 3rd-century Gaṇḍavyūha 
locates the original seat of Mañjusr ī at Nāgārjunakoṇḍa, 
Yijing considered Mount Wutai in China to be the adopt ed 
home of that Bodhisattva (Lamotte 1960 : 84–85), and this is 
the very reason why Indian monks Prajña and Vajrabo dhi 
travelled to China (Copp in Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 
2011: 361; cf. Sen 2003 : 76–86); ms. CUL Add. 1643 of the 
Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Prajñāpāramitā mentions a mahācīne mañ -
jughoṣaḥ [‘Mañjuśrī in (Greater) China’] (Kim 2014 : 49, 
67). Mediaeval Sanskrit and Tibetan sources speak about 
the traditions of Mah ācīna- or Mah ācīnakrama-T ārā and 
a (markedly transgressive) Chinese mode ( cīnācāra) of 
worshipping T ārā (see N.N. Bhattacharyya 2005 : 98, 106, 
110; Bühnemann 1996 ).
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   10 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 11] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 11
contacts. With the exception of a handful of recent 
studies dealing with aspects of ( Esoteric ) Buddhism 
in the context of Southeast Asia and maritime 
connectivity,33 much of previous scholarship has 
tended to either display a bias towards (rei ied 
and/or constructed) manifestations of heravāda 
and exoteric Mah āyāna Buddhism in the area, or 
perceive it as a consumer rather than a ‘genera-
tor’ of Esoteric Buddhism. As a consequence, the 
creative and constitutive force of Southeast Asian 
agents and milieux in the transfer, transformation, 
and ‘translocation’ of people, texts, notions, and 
artefacts remains to be fully appreciated. he ex-
istence of a Sinhala monastic complex in Central 
Java, a Śailendra-Śrīvijayan monastery at N ālandā, 
and a Śailendra‐Cūḍāmaṇivarmavih āra at Nākap-
paṭṭiṉam; the survival, besides the Chinese reports, 
of Sanskrit and vernacular textual materials (from 
epigraphic as well as manuscript sources) of Man -
tranaya and Vajray āna persuasion, some of which 
contain quotations traceable to Sanskrit Tantras; 
and the signi icant remains of statues, ritual im-
plements, and monuments, all conjure up the role 
of insular Southeast Asia as a recognized seat of 
esoteric cults in a highly interconnected Buddhist 
cosmopolis rather than a remote and backward 
periphery.34 Recent epigraphical studies by Grif-
iths have underlined ‘the pan-Asian character of 
Buddhism and the integral place the Indonesian Ar -
chipelago once held in the ancient Buddhist world’ 
(2014 a: 137). Woodward ( 2004 : 353) has advanced an 
argument for ‘treating Indonesia and India as an 
integral unit well into the ninth century’, making ‘a 
case for possible in luence of Borobudur Buddhism 
upon subsequent developments in India’, yet at the 
same time admitting that ‘there is little evidence of 
inhabitants of Southeast Asia participating in the 
creation of the Yogini Tantras’. On the other hand, 
33. See Woodward 2004 ; Kandahjaya 2004  (esp. 40–112); 
Sundberg and Giebel 2011; Sharrock 2012 , 2013a; Sen 2014 a; 
Long 2014 .
34. hese data would seem to lend some support to 
Tāranātha’s claim—however exaggerated it may be—that, 
from the time of king Dharmap āla (late 8th–early 9th 
century) on, there were in madhyade śa many students 
from Southeast Asian kingdoms, and  during the time of 
the four Senas about half of the monks of Magadha were 
from Southeast Asia (see D. Chattopadhyaya 1982: 330).the contribution of insular Southeast Asian masters 
to Vajrayāna Buddhism in Tibet, also through the 
handful of texts composed in ‘Suvar ṇadvīpa’ that 
were introduced into the Tibetan canon (e.g., the 
Durbodhāloka by Dharmak īrti), is acknowledged 
by the Tibetan tradition from the 11th century, and 
conirmed by modern scholarship (see Schoter-
man, this volume, and below, p. 19). Transmission 
of Buddhist ideas from Sumatra and/or Java to the 
Himalayan region has been suggested on the basis 
of artistic and architectural similarities between 
the Tabo monastery in Himachal Pradesh, which 
Atīśa visited in 1042 , and Borobudur (Wayman 
1981: 140–42; Nihom 1994 : 72, n. 192; cf. Kimmet 
2012 : 98–99 and Lokesh Chandra and Singhal 1999). 
Be this as it may, it is di icult not to concur with 
Skilling (1997: 188) that ‘the composition of Dur-
bodhāloka  presupposes the existence and study 
in Śrīvijaya of the abstruse Prajñ āpāramitā and 
Abhisamay ālaṃkāra literature; of a high level of 
scholarship; and of royal sponsorship’. his sce-
nario is also suggested by the igure of Shihu ( 施護,  
*Dānapāla, d. 1018), an exceptionally proli ic South 
Asian monk-translator who in the late 10th century 
reached China with a good knowledge of the lan-
guages of Sanfochi ( Śrīvijaya) and Shepo (Java) (see 
Sen 2003 : 384; Orzech 2011a: 449–50).
Both Sumatra and Java are likely to have acted 
as important places in the development of (eso-
teric fashions in) the cults of Mañju śrī and Tārā, 
which had an inherent ‘maritime’ aspect insofar 
that they were tutelary deities of travellers, and 
seafarers in particular (Hanneder 2008 , Ray 2012 : 
56–60, Bopearachchi 2014 ); the popularity of those 
deities in Sri Lanka, mainland Southeast Asia, Java , 
Sumatra, and China suggests the existence of strong 
Buddhist connections between those locales by the 
9th century.35 As pointed out by Chou ( 1945: 321) 
35. On Java and Sumatra as early seats of Mañju śrī and 
Tārā cults, as well as the possible connection between forms 
of Tārā, the Javanese Nyai Loro Kidul, and the Chinese 
Guanyin, see respectively Miksic 2006  and Jordaan 1997, 
1998 . On the pan-Asian cult of Mah āpratisarā—a female 
deity not unrelated to T ārā—and especially its Javanese 
attestations, see Cruijsen, Gri iths and Klokke 2012 . Sund -
berg (2004 : 114–16) has postulated the presence in Java 
of Chinese Buddhist personalities on the basis of a lin-
tel-piece from Candi Sewu, which depicts among many 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   11 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 12] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 12
and Sundberg and Giebel ( 2011: 152), according to 
an account by Yuanzhao compiled into the Zhenyu -
an xinding shijiao mulu, and also to the Japanese 
master Kūkai, Vajrabodhi (a.k.a. Vajrabuddhi; see 
Appendix A by Sinclair) irst met Amoghavajra 
in Java, which should have displayed evidence of 
theological sophistication because it likely
ranked among the locales suitable for a well-ed-
ucated Indian religious adept like Vajrabodhi 
to occupy his time, instead of energetically re-
suming his approach to his intended destina-
tion of China. Indeed, Java had for centuries 
been an exponent of Indian Sanskritic culture, 
in both Śaiva and Bauddha strains, and some 
locations on the island must have been per-
ceived as hospitable ground for Vajrabodhi.
Java under the Śailendras, with such majestic 
and exquisitely cra ted Buddhist monuments as 
Borobudur, Candi Sewu, Plaosan, and Mendut, 
must have ranked among the great sacred centres of 
Buddhism. his may be inferred, e.g., from the mid 
9th-century Siddham ātṛkā inscription unearthed at 
Candi Plaosan in the Prambanan area (de Casparis 
1956: 188–89, 202), which describes the worship 
of a Buddha-temple ( jinamandira ) by pilgrims 
continuously arriving from Gurjarade śa (Gujarat, 
or the dominions of the Gurjara-Pratih āras in 
North India?). he illustrated manuscript of the 
Aṣṭasāhasrikā-Prajñāpāramitā CUL Add. 1643 
dedicates a vignette to  (an image of the Buddha) 
Dīpaṅkara in Java (f. 2r). As argued by Sinclair (this 
volume, p. 31) on the basis of the Tantric geography 
exposed by the Manjuśriyamūlakalpa (51.636–640), 
‘by the late eighth century Kali ṅgoḍra, the ‘‘Mari-
time Kәliṅ’’, had been accorded Buddhavacana-lev -
el recognition in the Sanskritic world’.
Given its strategic geographical location, the 
Malay Peninsula, where the domains of Śailendra/
Śrīvijayan Buddhist rulers were located, acted as 
an important intersection in the tra ic of pilgrims 
bearded igures one of distinctive Sinitic appearance (cf. 
Klokke 2011: 20–21). Woodward ( 1977) has discussed some 
Chinese silk patterns on the decorative motifs of Candi 
Sewu, hypothesized a Chinese (Daoist) in luence on the nu -
merological patterns of Borobudur’s upper terraces ( 1999 ), 
and argued that the Javanese Bianhong, who studied in 
China under Huiguo, might have been the ‘mastermind’ 
of Borobudur ( 2009 ).plying the maritime routes. Testimony to this fact 
are the many sealings found at multiple sites in th e 
period from the 6th to the 12th century; some of 
these objects display (esoteric) Mah āyāna iconog-
raphy and are inscribed in northeastern Indian 
scripts, suggesting that they could have belonged 
to pilgrims from the Subcontinent (Jacq-Her-
goualc’h 2002 : 47). Manuscript CUL Add. 1643 (f. 
120r) mentions a Lokan ātha on Mount Valavat ī in 
Kedah (Ka ṭahadvīpa).36 he exquisitely cra ted late  
8th-century bronze Avalokite śvaras found in the 
Chaiya district of modern hailand and in Bidor 
(Perak, Malaysia) show close similarities with the 
Avalokite śvara found at Wonogiri in Central Java, 
suggesting a link between those locales (see Shar-
rock and Bunker, this volume).
As attested to by epigraphic and archaeological 
evidence, the Cam and Khmer domains were fully 
integrated in the web of intra-regional Southeast 
Asian networks connecting the mainland and 
the Malay Peninsula to Java, Sumatra, and China 
between the 7th and 10th centuries. hose locales 
hosted Esoteric Buddhist masters (such as K īr-
tipaṇḍita and Pu ṇyodaya),37 and were the seats 
of monastic institutions or temples devoted to 
the worship of esoteric Mah āyānic Lokeśvaras.38 
36. See Kim 2014 : 49, 63, 65 (who erroneously locates 
Kedah in Indonesia rather than Peninsular Malaysia).
37. An inscription of the reign of Jayavarman V (r. 968–ca. 
1000 ) tells us that K īrtipaṇḍita, an adept of the Buddhist 
Yogatantras, acted in the capacity of royal guru, teach-
ing the Tattvasaṅgraha  and its commentaries (Sanderson 
2003 –4: 427, n. 284, 2004 : 238; Green 2014 : 84–85). Puṇyo-
daya travelled from India to China and then back to main-
land Southeast Asia (see Lin 1935, Woodward 1988 , 2004 ). 
On peninsular Southeast Asian traces of Vajrabodhi, see 
Sharrock ( 2012 , 2013a, this volume).
38. A stele found at An hái village in Vietnam’s Qu ảng 
Nam province, dated ad 902, documents an example of a 
monastery built primarily as a site of Mah āyāna and Va-
jrayāna worship (Sinclair 2012 ). Chutiwongs ( 2005 : 80–81) 
has hypothesized a connection between doctrinal ele ments 
featuring in the inscription and the Sanskrit-Old J avanese 
text Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan . Sanderson ( 2009 : 117–18) 
discusses a few inscriptions from the 9th and 10th cen-
turies that record the installation of esoteric Mah āyānic 
Lokeśvaras —and, at the same time, Śaiva deities—along 
with the construction and support of associated vihāras, 
e.g., the Đông Dương stele of 875 and the  Nham Biền stele 
of 908. he latter inscription relates that the courtier R ā-
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   12 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 13] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 13
Several iconographic features of Wat Phra Maen 
in Nakhon Pathom, as well as related Buddhist 
statuary from Dv āravatī, display esoteric overtones, 
suggesting that esoteric forms of Mah āyāna Bud-
dhism may have evolved there in heravāda guise.39
the ‘first  wave ’ of esoteric  buddhism  
(ca. 7th–early  10th  century  ad)
he early networks that initiated the expansion of 
an ‘Esoteric Buddhist package’ from the 7th century 
were constituted by monks a iliated to related es-
oteric orders,40 who travelled—o ten alongside, or 
even in the capacity of diplomatic envoys41—along 
the paths opened by long-distance traders that fa-
voured the quick exchange of goods, peoples, and 
ideas.42 hanks to textual evidence, and especially 
jadvāra made two trips ( siddhayātra, either pilgrimages 
or diplomatic missions) to Java (Mabbett 1986 : 302, Green 
2014 : 80–83). Green 2014  and Schweyer 2009  are surveys 
of the relevant epigraphic and (art-)historical evidence. 
On the iconography of Đông Dương and its relationship 
with the Tantric Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra, see Woodward 2011.
39. See Revire 2010 . For the worship of Bodhisattvas 
Avalokite śvara and Vajrap āṇi in central hailand, perhaps 
as early as the second half of the 7th century, see Boisselier 
1965: 149; Chutiwongs 1984 : 221, 256–57; Revire 2010 : 98. For 
a khakkhara  inial and several other bronze ritual objects 
that have close parallels with Esoteric Buddhist material 
found in Central Java and beyond, see Revire 2009 , 2015b: 
139, n. 22).
40. All the major igures in the transmission of Esoter-
ic Buddhism to China and Southeast Asia up to the 8th 
century were monks. However, a category of non-mona stic, 
householder vajrācāryas seems to have become more im-
portant than vajrācārya monks in South Asia during the 
late phase of Vajray āna in South Asia (modern Balinese 
‘Bauddha Brahmins’ may be considered the heirs to this 
category of householder-practitioners: see Sinclair 2012 ). 
A current scholarly desideratum remains to identify the 
networks of non-institutionalized practitioners, in cluding 
siddha s and low-caste ritual or performance specialists, 
who contributed to the spread of forms of Tantrism over-
seas (see Acri 2014 ).
41. See Sen ( 2003 : 37–44) on the Tang-sponsored Bud-
dhist diplomatic missions in the 7th century, and further, 
Sundberg and Giebel ( 2011) on the diplomatic connections 
of Vajrabodhi’s journeys. Sinclair (this volume, p. 48) spec -
ulates that the diplomatic lines of communication b etween 
the Tang capitals and insular Southeast Asia might have 
been used by Buddhist monks Bianhong and Prajña.
42. P.C. Cha k ravar ti (in Majumdar 1971: 662), citing Pliny the Sino-Japanese biographies of early masters, 
we are now able to reconstruct, albeit with an 
element of uncertainty, the probable pedigree and 
social circle of those prominent individual agents. 
hose charismatic personalities, more o ten than 
not associated with a vigorous activity of transla-
tion, commentarial work, and initiation of pupils, 
travelled—at times tracing the footsteps of their 
master(s)—both eastwards and westwards along 
the sea routes between the Indian Subcontinent 
and Japan. It is probably this network of masters 
and their disciples that acquired, transformed, and 
propagated images, texts and devotional practices 
connected with Buddhist divinities ranging from 
the Bodhisattvas and Goddesses that were popular 
in both exoteric and esoteric Mah āyāna milieux, 
such as Avalokite śvara, Mañju śrī, Vajrapāṇi, and 
Tārā, to the ferocious forms of Vajrap āṇi/Vajras -
attva and Heruka (and his hypostases Hevajra and 
Saṁvara) that became predominant in Phase Two/
hree Vajray āna. 
hat the 7th- and early 8th-century networks 
were crucial for the formation and consolidation 
of Esoteric Buddhist cults and practices across 
Maritime Asia is suggested by the ‘archaic’ nature 
of the theological and ritual framework of major 
Esoteric Buddhist traditions outside of the Indian 
Subcontinent. As White ( 2000 : 21) points out: 
What we ind, in fact, is that the historical time 
frame in which the transmission (to China, 
Tibet, Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia) of vari-
ous Indian Tantric paradigms occurred has 
invariably proven de initive for the structure 
and content of the ‘export’ Tantric tradition in 
question. It is as if the original revelation re-
and the account by Chinese pilgrim Faxian, notes th at the 
journey by merchant ship from the P āla port-city of T ām-
ralipti to Sri Lanka (en route to Southeast Asia an d China) 
took only a fortnight. Yijing recounts that thirty- seven out 
of the sixty Chinese monks who went to the Indian Sub-
continent travelled by sea on merchant ships; further, he 
states that his own journey from Canton to Sumatra took a 
month, while the remaining leg from Kedah in Penins ular 
Malaysia to the Nicobar islands took ten days, and from 
there to T āmralipti it took iteen days (Ray 2008 : 124). 
But according to other sources, because of the prevailing 
direction of monsoon winds, it was nearly impossible to 
make a return voyage between China and the Indian Sub-
continent in one year (see Jordaan and Colless 2009 : 112).
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   13 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 14] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 14
mained fossilized, like an insect in a block of 
amber, in the export tradition. his is mani-
festly the case, for example, with Japanese Shin-
gon—founded by K ūkai (774–835 C.E.)—whose 
core revelations are the seventh-century C.E. 
Mahāvairocana-s ūtra and the Tattvasaṅgra-
ha-sūtra.… Shingon practice remains, in many 
respects, a preserved specimen of those en-
shrined in seventh-century Indian paradigms, 
but with a Japanese overlay.… Similarly, Tibet-
an Buddhism, with its preponderance of Va-
jrayāna practice based on revelations found in 
what would later be classi ied as the Tantras of 
Yoga and Supreme Yoga, preserves the Tantric 
status quo of eighth-century India, from which 
it was introduced into Tibet by the legendary 
Vimalamitra and Padmasambhava.
Analogous considerations have been made by 
Nihom (1994 : 189) with respect to Buddhist data 
preserved on Java and Sumatra. Re lecting a doc-
trinal situation preceding 8th-century systemati-
zations, they 
may greatly aid us in attempting to reconstruct 
the intellectual history of the Tantras in In-
dia itself by providing a control relative to the 
much better known, preserved and studied tra-
ditions of Central and East Asia’.43 
Among the early prominent monks are the 
Central Indian Atik ūṭa (l. 650s) and Pu ṇyodaya 
(Chin. Nati 那提 , l. 650s), the Chinese Yijing 
(635–713),44 Baosiwei ( 寶思惟, Skt. *Maṇicinta -
na/*Maṇicinta or *Ratnacinta, d. 721), and the 
South Indian Dharmaruci/Bodhiruci (d. 727). 
he vectors and initiators of a systematic, fully 
developed form of Esoteric Buddhism are ‘three 
great ācāryas’ of the mid-Tang period, namely 
the Indian Śubhākarasiṁha (Chin. Shanwuwei 善
43. See Acri 2011a: 12–15 for analogous remarks on the 
archaic theology informing Śaiva texts from premodern 
Java and Bali, which also seem to predate the mature Said-
dhāntika systematizations.
44. Although the status of Yijing as an Esoteric Budd hist 
monk is debated, his biographies suggest that he trained 
with Śubhākarasiṁha and was acquainted with the teach-
ings of the Vajraśekhara and Guhyatantra , besides writing 
a commentary of the Mahāvairocanas ūtra (see Keyworth 
in Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 2011: 342–43; Shinohara 
2014 : 147–67).無畏 , 637–735),45 Vajrabodhi (Chin. Jingangzhi 金
剛智 ; 671–741),46 and Vajrabodhi’s ordained pupil 
Amoghavajra (Chin. Bukong 不空 ; 704–74; probably 
a native of Samarkand).47 his triad, which inspired 
various generations of pupils,48 was bound to be 
associated with a ‘canon’, as it were, of revealed 
scriptures, commentaries, ritual manuals and their 
connected practices49 for many centuries to come. 
Among the 8th- and 9th-century igures related 
to this triad, and especially to its last member 
Amoghavajra, were N āgabodhi (Chin. Longzhi 龍
智),50 whose biography remains obscure but who is 
45. He was probably the eldest son of King Buddhakara, 
the alleged ancestor of the Bhauma-Kara dynasty kings of 
Odisha (Chou 1945: 251–52, n. 3; Pinte in Orzech, Sørensen 
and Payne 2011: 340; cf. Tanaka 2014 ).
46. According to an account by Zanning, he was a Brah-
man from South India (Malayak ūṭa), whose father served 
as purohita  at the royal court of K āñcī (Orzech 2011c: 346). 
Conversely, Lü Xiang’s biography reports that he was the 
third son of Īśānavarman ( yeshanawamo  伊舍那靺摩 ), 
the kṣatriya  king of a Central Indian dynasty (i.e., the 
Maukharis), and ‘because he was later recommended to 
the [Chinese] emperor by Mizhunna ( 米准那 ), the general 
of the king of a South Indian kingdom, he ended up being 
called a South Indian’ (trans. Giebel, in Sundberg and 
Giebel 2011: 134). (On the rendering of Chin. Jingangzhi 
金剛智  as Vajrabuddhi, see Appendix A).
47. Chinese biographies of Amoghavajra present contra-
dictory information, describing him as either the son of 
a Brahman or a merchant from Central Asia. Chou ( 1945: 
322) argues that Amoghavajra’s biographers tried to co nceal 
his embarrassing background as a merchant, which wo uld 
be undigni ied for a monk of his rank.
48. Orzech ( 2011c: 345) has noted that the three monks, 
who are traditionally referred to by later Chinese disci-
ples and Japanese scholars as the founders of the Chinese 
Zhenyan school, did not represent themselves as such.
49. hese were the Mahāvairocanas ūtra and Susiddhi -
karamahātantra  (irst propagated by Śubhākarasiṁha), 
the Sarvatath āgatatattvasa ṅgraha  (propagated by Va-
jrabodhi),  (versions of) the Guhyasam āja (already known 
to Nāgabodhi), Śrīparamādya, Sarvabuddha  samāyoga , ot-  
her revealed scriptures belonging to the Sarvatath āgata-
tattvasaṅgraha /Vajraśekhara  cycle ( Jingangding  金剛頂 , 
summarized and propagated by Amoghavajra), as well 
as Amoghavajra’s Jingangding jing yuqie shibahui zhigui .
50. he biographical material on this igure, who is said 
to have lived for one hundred years and counted among 
the Mahāsiddhas, is mostly of a supernatural or legendary 
nature—for example that he was instructed by the Mah āsid-
dha Nāgārjuna, and, like the latter, resided at Śrīśailam or 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   14 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 15] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 15
believed to have met Amoghavajra in Sri Lanka in 
the 740s, and previously Vajrabodhi; Amogha  vajra’s 
Chinese disciples Huilang (?– 781) and Huiguo 
(745–806); the latter’s Javanese disciple Bianhong  
(辨弘 , l. late 8th century); Prajña (Chin. Boruo 般若 , 
alt. Bolaruo 般剌若 ; ca. 744–810, likely from pres-
ent-day Afghanistan), disciple of Amoghavajra’s 
prominent pupil Yuanzhao (d. 800); the Koreans 
Pulga Saui and Hyecho (both l. 8th century),51 dis-
ciples of Śubhākarasiṁha and both Vajrabodhi 
and Amoghavajra respectively); and the Japanese 
Kūkai (774–835, Huiguo’s and Prajña’s disciple).52 
he networks of 7th- to 9th-century monks may 
be visualized on a map of Maritime Asia (Map 1.1, 
p. 16), where ‘Indian’, ‘Sri Lankan’, ‘ Śailendra and 
Javanese’, ‘Chinese’, and ‘Korean-Japanese’ circles 
ofer a telling picture of the extraordinary period of 
intra-Asian connectivity that became the hallmark 
of the rise and spread of Esoteric Buddhist tradi-
tions in the course of just two or three generations.
he initial triad formed by N āgabodhi, Va-
jrabodhi and Amoghavajra had strong ties with 
Southern India and Sri Lanka, both of which areas 
acted as an important hub for the dissemination of 
Esoteric Buddhism to Southeast Asia. On account 
of the shared artistic styles and iconographical 
motifs, Holt ( 1991: 82) argued that the regions of 
Pallava South India, Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia 
‘constituted a veritable cultural triangle from the 
seventh into the ninth century’. Noting the ‘pan-
Asian inluence of the cultural dyad of Pallava 
India and Śrī Laṅkā’ in the 8th century, Sundberg 
and Giebel ( 2011: 153) focus on the status of some 
Buddhist sects operating in K āñcī and at the  
Abhayagirivih āra as custodians of esoteric texts 
and oral teachings that played a key role in shapin g 
Kāñcī; yet, his historicity cannot be automatically discount -
ed on those grounds. On this igure, whose Chinese name 
is variously rendered in secondary sources as N āgabodhi, 
Nāgabuddhi, or *N āgajñāna/Nāgajña, see Van der Kuijp 
2007 , Sundberg and Giebel 2011, and especially Sinclair’s 
Appendix A in this volume. 
51. On the extensive, and seemingly repeated, travels of 
Hyecho to India and Central Asia, see Deeg 2010 .
52. For a list of several other Indian monks who ‘cam e to 
the Tang and settled, taught, and translated texts’ in the 
course of the 9th century, such as Shi Mayue, Bodhivajra, 
Vajrasiddhi, Bodhir ṣi, and Prajñacakra, see Orzech 2011b: 
328–30.the mediaeval pan-Asian Esoteric Buddhist par-
adigm. King Narasi ṁhapotavarman (i.e., Nara-
siṁhavarman II R ājasiṁha, r. 700–728) of Kāñcī 
granted Vajrabodhi special protection and sent his 
general ‘Mizhunna’ (Chin. 米准那 ) along with him 
to China on a diplomatic mission. So amicable were 
the relations between the Pallavas and the Tangs 
in that period that Narasi ṁhavarman II built a 
Buddhist ‘Pagoda’ in N ākappaṭṭiṉam in honour 
of the Chinese emperor, allowing him to name 
it (Seshadri 2009 : 109–18).53 It is, again, through a 
Pallava link that Vajrabodhi, on the occasion of his 
visit to Sri Lanka on the way to China, enjoyed the 
protection of King M ānavarman (‘ Śrīśīla’ of Va-
jrabodhi’s biography), who prior to his coronation 
in 684 underwent a long exile in K āñcī, serving as 
a general (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 145–46). As 
argued by Sundberg and Giebel (ibid.),
Such repeated, persistent diplomatic inter-
course may serve as an explanatory context for 
Vajrabodhi’s easy access to the inner sanctum 
of the Tang court. In fact, given the chronol-
ogy, one surmises that the welcome arrival of 
Vajrabodhi or Mizhunna in Guangfu in 719 
ce actually instigated the series of intense and 
cordial diplomatic interchanges between the 
Chinese and the Pallavas recorded to occur in 
720. If so, their salutary e fect paralleled the ar-
rival of Amoghavajra in La ṅkā in 742, where 
the transmission of religious knowledge and 
texts between highly adept monks immediate-
ly stimulated a high-level religio-diplomatic 
interchange between the Buddhist Sinhalese 
king at Anur ādhapura and the Tang emperor 
at Chang’an. A similar occurrence seemingly 
transpired some half a century later, when the 
Javanese kings became patrons involved in the 
Sinhalese dispensations, likely involving pre-
cisely this same style of interchange of Tantric 
texts and, in the Javanese case, a cadre of adept 
monks as well. 
53. Sen (2003 : 26) argues that this alliance, and in par-
ticular the 720 diplomatic mission (and in general other 
post-Harṣa South Asian missions), might have had the 
purpose of contrasting contemporary Arab and Tibetan 
invasions of areas of the Subcontinent. Equally amicable 
relations between the Buddhist Tang and Kanauj could be 
evinced by the 7th-century Buddhist diplomatic missions 
(ibid.: 34–40), which Sen characterizes as ‘spiritual under-
pinnings of diplomatic exchanges’.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   15 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 16] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 16
Map 1.1: Paths travelled by the monks ( 7th–9th century) between India, mainland and insular Southeast Asia, 
China, Japan and Korea. (Map by Swati Chemburkar and Andrea Acri)
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   16 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 17] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 17
It would appear that in the Sri Lankan Buddhist 
milieux—i.e., in the Abhayagirivih āra itself—were 
found repositories of esoteric texts unavailable in 
China, and perhaps even inaccessible to travellers 
to India. As argued by Sundberg and Giebel ( 2011: 
148), it was the quest for these texts, and the desire 
to receive abhiṣeka in a Sinhalese lineage seemingly 
associated with either N āgabodhi or *Ratnabodhi 
(Chin. Baojue 寶覺 ), that prompted Amoghavajra 
to travel to Sri Lanka from China following the 
footsteps of his teacher Vajrabodhi.54 Prajña too 
returned to South India from China to look for 
esoteric texts belonging to the Vidy ādhara tradi-
tions ( chiming 持明 ), and studied yogic techniques 
under consecration master *Dharmaya śas (Chin. 
Damoyeshe 達摩耶舍 : Copp in Orzech, Sørensen 
and Payne 2011: 360–61).
So great was the religious aura and political 
prestige of South Asian centres of Buddhism that 
the ‘peripheries’ (i.e., outer regions) of the Budd hist 
cosmopolis tried to link themselves to these centre s, 
thus becoming themselves centres with respect to 
the new peripheries that were being created as net-
works moved and the Buddhist frontiers extended—
what Sen ( 2014 b: xvii) has described as the emer-
gence of ‘multiple centres of Buddhist discourse’. A 
case in point is that of late 8th-century Central Java, 
where a branch of the Sri Lankan Abhayagirivih āra, 
apparently intended for the use of esoteric-mind-
ed Sinhalese Buddhist monks, was established by 
the Śailendras on the Ratu Boko promontory;55 
indeed, the area in the Kedu plain where Candi 
Sewu and the Prambanan temple complex were 
built appears to have been termed La ṅkapura by 
then, as if to recreate a local ‘replica’ of (Buddhist) 
Sri Lanka.56 As shown by Miksic ( 1993–94), Degroot 
54. On p. 190 the authors, referring to the biography of 
Hanguang ( T 2061 .879b18), mention the Sinhalese *Sa-
mantabhadra as Amoghavajra’s ‘ inal’ initiator (cf. Chou 
1945: 290–91; Lokesh Chandra 1993b: 114). Other biogra-
phies mention *N āgajñāna (i.e., N āgabodhi/N āgabuddhi 
龍智) and *Ratnabodhi (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 192–93; 
Sundberg 2014 : 77). 
55. As is testified to by an 8th-century Siddham ātṛkā 
foundation inscription (see de Casparis 1950 : 11–22, 1961, 
1981; Lokesh Chandra 1993 a; Sundberg 2004 , this vo l
ume). 
56. See Gri iths 2011a, and compare with Acri 2010 , 
arguing that R āvaṇa’s defeat by R āma and Lak ṣmaṇa in (2006 ), and Sundberg ( 2004 , 2011, this volume), the 
Abhayagirivih āra-related structures of Ratu Boko 
share with their Sinhalese prototypes—that is to 
say, some of the Abhayagiri peripheral structures 
apparently populated by ascetic monks—common 
architectural motifs, such as double meditation 
platforms. 
he use of Siddham ātṛkā—a (north)eastern-In-
dian variety of script, native to N ālandā—in foreign 
lands is well documented in extensive Esoteric 
Buddhist textual corpora from China and Japan. 
he numerically small, but culturally signi icant, 
corpus of inscriptions using this script scattered 
over disparate locales of Maritime Asia, besides 
being a token of the networks of Esoteric Buddhist 
specialists who plied those routes, may constitute 
‘an attempt to be cosmopolitan, to connect with a 
respected cultural powerhouse, and implies the 
rapid dissemination of knowledge and of religious 
innovation’ (Sundberg and Giebel 2011: 200, n. 
126). Pāla-sponsored N ālandā in the northeastern 
part of the Subcontinent, apart from being an old 
and illustrious centre of Buddhism, was also the 
cultural centre that dictated the predominant re-
ligious and aesthetic paradigm in the Buddhist 
cosmopolis from the 8th to the 13th century. As 
documented by the dual Siddham ātṛkā/Grantha 
inscription of Narasi ṁhapotavarman to his early 
8th century cave-temple Atira ṇacaṇḍeśvara and 
in the Kail āsanātha, even a fervently Śaiva dynasty 
such as the Pallava was eager to anchor itself to it  by 
conforming to a certain ‘N ālandā idiom’ (Sundberg 
and Giebel 2012 : 199, n. 126; Francis 2013).
Nālandā, which by the 9th century was ‘the 
center of a new Asia-wide Tantric network’ (Hall 
2010 : 21), constituted—alongside the South Indian 
Pallava realms and Sri Lanka—the common nexus 
(whether real or imagined) between many of the 
agents who played a role in shaping early Esoteric 
Sri Lanka as described in the Sanskrit and Old Javanese 
versions of the Rāmāyaṇa represents an allegory for so-
cio-political events of mid 9th-century Java—that is, the 
shit from an extended royal Buddhist favouritism to a n ew 
Śaiva course. See also Gri iths 2013 for a hypothesis con-
cerning the existence of ‘multiple Abhayagiris in more than 
one part of Southeast Asia—southern Cambodia, southe rn 
Vietnam, peninsular hailand, besides the one on Java’ (p. 
75), and cf. Conti 2014 : 384 and 394, n. 3.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   17 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 18] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 18
Buddhist networks.57 It was in the milieu of N ālandā 
that Śubhākarasiṁha, Vajrabodhi and Prajña were 
instructed and received their ordination before 
undertaking the career of travelling masters; Va-
jrabodhi received royal patronage in K āñcī and Sri 
Lanka. In luence from both the Pallava realms and 
Nālandā may be detected at the enigmatic R ājiṇāvi-
hāra, a Pallava-style late 8th-century temple built 
in a locale just north of Kandy, which now bears 
the name of N ālandā. he temple ( geḍigē) features 
erotic reliefs of transgressive character (Mudiyans e 
1967: 71; Chandawimala 2013: 146–47), and Doha-
nian (1977: 26, 131, n. 27) refers to the existence of a 
short 9th-century Siddhamātṛkā inscription found 
nearby (cf. Sundberg, this volume, n. 13). he evoca -
tive name of N ālandā extended further to Southeast 
Asia: the Sumatran royal B ālaputradeva, who was 
seemingly involved in the dynastic struggle that 
took place in Central Java in the mid- 9th century,58 
is mentioned in an inscription issued by Devap āla at 
Nālandā, which records his sponsorship of a vihāra 
for the use of pilgrims from Śrīvijaya;59 a locale 
57. For a concise summary of the interactions between 
Sri Lanka and the centres of Tantrism patronized by the 
Pālas, see Sen 2014 a: 53. It is noteworthy that, according to 
Tāranātha (D. Chattopadhyaya 1980 : 18), the Sri Lankan 
Jaya bhadra, one of the earliest exegetes of the Laghusaṁ-
vara/Heruk ābhidhāna, was vajrācārya at Vikrama śīla (for 
a mid-9th century date, see Gray 2005 a: 61, n. 61 and 62, n. 
65; contrast Sanderson 2009 : 159, who traces his tenure back 
to 880–92). he same Jayabhadra, at an earlier stage of his 
career, is recorded in the colophon of his Cakrasaṃvara -
pañjikā (ed. Sugiki, 2001 ) as having resided in the famous 
Buddhist establishment of Mah ābimba in Ko ṅkana (the 
Konkan coast of western India; see Szántó 2016 : 2 and cf. 
above, p. 8). Tāranātha reports the same information (see 
D. Chattopadhyaya 1980 : 325; cf. 296).
58. Sundberg (this volume, Appendix B) contests the 
reading vālaputra  on the Śivagṛha inscription, which 
was at the basis of the dynastic theory proposed by de 
Casparis ( 1956). While his e fort is valuable insofar that it 
highlights the need to re-edit and translate that i mportant 
(and, regrettably, heavily withered) inscription, I remai n 
unconvinced by his re-evaluation, and regard the reading 
bālaputra as the most likely.
59. See H. Sastri 1923–24. Jordaan and Colless ( 2009 : 28–40), 
having compared the Wanua Tengah III inscription with 
the Nālandā edict in the light of Jordaan’s revised chronol-
ogy of the P āla kings, argue that B ālaputra was already king 
in Sumatra before he came to Java, only to advance his 
claim to succession a ter Rakai Pikatan ascended the throne named Nālandā (nalәnda, nalanda ) is mentioned, 
alongside V ārāṇasī, in two 10th-century Balinese 
inscriptions in connection with the Buddhist pre-
ceptor ( upādhyāya) Dhanavan (Ardika 2015: 34; 
Goris 1954: 83, 86).60 As has long since been noted, 
Nālandā played a major role in the transmission 
of artistic motifs to Southeast Asia since the 8th 
century (Bernet Kempers 1933, Lunsingh Scheurleer 
and Klokke 1988).
he period from the middle of the 9th up to 
the end of t he 10th century has been character-
ized as a ‘dark age for Buddhism’ in China and 
Tibet (Matsunaga 1978: viii), and one also notes 
a reduced scale of Buddhist building activities in 
Southeast Asia, with the single exception of the 
temple of Đông Dương in Camp ā (Woodward 
2011: 33). his predicament may have been related 
to the disruption of diplomatic, religious, and 
trade networks between locales where support for 
Esoteric Buddhism, or Buddhism alt ogether, by 
the ruling elites faded away, such as China under 
Emperor Wuzong (r. 814–46), Tibet under King 
Lang Darma (r. 838–41), Sri Lanka under Sena II 
(r. 854–89) and his successors (Sundberg 2014 ), and 
Java from around 850 onwards (see the chapters by 
in 847. his hypothesis suggests that the contacts between 
Bālaputra and the P āla King Devap āla may have been not 
only of a religious and cultural nature. For instance, the 
possibility of a political alliance formed by B ālaputra, just 
a few years before his Javanese expedition, with the P āla 
ruler would make perfect sense in the system of alliances 
among neighboring maṇḍalas as theorized in the Sanskrit 
Arthaśāstra (cf. Wolters 1999 : 28–29 for Southeast Asian 
examples). A link between Java and northeastern India, 
i.e., a Śailendra e fort to connect to P āla-sourced Esoteric 
Buddhist doctrines, is also suggested by the mention, in 
the Siddham ātṛkā inscription of Kelurak ( ad 782) found 
between Candi Sewu and Candi Lumbung in Central Jav a, 
of one Kum āraghoṣa, a royal preceptor ( rājaguru ) from 
Gauḍīdvīpa (modern Bengal) who installed an image of 
Mañjugho ṣa (Mañjuśrī) at the request of Śailendra King Śrī 
Saṅgrāmadhanañjaya (Sarkar 1971 I: 37, 45). he word go-
lapaṇḍitā (= gauḍapaṇḍitā) featuring in the undated Pasir 
Panjang rock inscription at Karimun Besar in the Riau 
archipelago has been interpreted as having been engr aved 
by a monk from Bengal (i.e., N ālandā?) en route to main-
land Sumatra or Java by Caldwell and Hazlewood ( 1994 ).
60. As pointed out by Ardika (ibid.), those Balinese in-
scriptions indicate that toponyms associated with c entres of 
Buddhism in the Subcontinent, such as V ārāṇasī, Nālandā 
and Amar āvatī, were transferred to local places. 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   18 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 19] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 19
Sundberg and Acri in this volume). Another factor 
may have been the contraction of the P āla empire 
from ca. 850 to 977, which could have caused a 
decline in royal benefactions to Esoteric Buddhism 
in northeastern India (Sanderson 2009 : 96–97) and 
a negative ‘cascade e fect’ overseas, especially with 
respect to maritime trade.
the ‘second  wave ’ of esoteric   
buddhism  (ca. late  10th –13th   
century  ad)
Nālandā-style imagery of Esoteric Buddhist divin-
ities (re)appears in 11th- and 12th-century Angkor, 
Bagan, the Malay Peninsula, and East Java. As 
argued by Skilling ( 2007 : 97), 
When we take into account other inscriptions 
and icons from the Malay Peninsula, togeth -
er with epigraphic and iconographic evidence 
from Cambodia, we can conclude that in the 
eleventh century the Malay Peninsula and the 
Khmer lands participated in the intellectual, 
ritual, and iconographic world of P āla culture, 
which at that time spread throughout the region, 
from India to Tibet and insular Southeast Asia.
Vestiges of Vajray āna Buddhism in 10th- and 
11th-century Java may be found in the groups of 
bronzes from Surocolo and Nganjuk, which have 
been suggested to represent esoteric maṇḍalas 
dominated by Vajrasattva, the central deity of 
Phase Two and hree Esoteric Buddhism.61 Sumatra 
hosted renowned centres of Buddhist activity and 
higher learning by the 7th century, as documented 
by Yijing’s account,62 yet the archaeological remains 
61. See Lokesh Chandra and Singhal 1995; Tanaka 2010 : 
339; Sharma 2011. On the popularity of Vajrasattva as Ādi-
buddha in both Java and Cambodia, see Sharrock 2006 , 
2007 , 2011a; cf. Conti 2014 : 273–77 (note the mention of 
Vajrasattva as Ādibuddha in the Sab B āk inscription).
62. In 671, this Chinese monk praised the high level 
of Buddhist scholarship he found in Sumatra, where he 
stopped—en-route from Guangzhou to N ālandā and from 
there back to China—to read Sanskrit S ūtras. In the ac-
counts of his travels he advised that ‘if a Chinese priest 
wishes to go to the West in order to hear (lectures ) and read 
(the original), he had better stay here [i.e., in S umatra] one 
or two years and practice the proper rules and then  proceed 
to Central India’ (Takakusu 1896 : xxxiv). Further, Yijing 
reports that Śākyakīrti, one of the ive most distinguished and scant epigraphic evidence spread over dis-
parate locales of the island—especially along the 
Batang Hari river (e.g., Muara Jambi and Muara 
Takus)—have yielded remains of Buddhist mon-
uments and inscriptions that mostly date back to 
the 10th to 13th century, and which display Tantric 
features.63 Nearly contemporary Tibetan traditions 
explicitly link esoteric teachings and lineages of 
masters to Sumatra ( suvarṇadvīpa): for instance, 
the South Asian *D īpaṅkaraśrījñāna, aka At īśa/
Atiśa64 (980–1054 ) was believed to have resided 
in Suvarṇadvīpa for twelve years (ca. 1011 to 1023), 
where he received the teaching of the K ālacakratan -
tra by a local master, known to the sources as 
Dharmak īrti, Dharmap āla, Piṇḍo/Piṭo, or Kalki 
Śrīpāla.65 Atīśa is said to have transmitted to Tibet 
the Durbodhāloka (a Sanskrit commentary on the 
Abhisamay ālaṅkāra), composed in Southeast Asia 
by his teacher Dharmak īrti from Suvar ṇadvīpa 
under King C ūḍāmaṇivarman, who around ad 
Buddhist teachers of his time, travelled far and la rge across 
the ‘Five Indias’ and inally settled in Śrīvijaya (Śrībhoja).
63. See Woodward 2004 ; Reichle 2007 ; Griiths 2014 c; 
Miksic (this volume); Kandahjaya (this volume). Pointing 
out that Buddhism thrived in Sumatra until the 14th or 
even 15th century, Gri iths (2014 c: 239) makes the follow-
ing relevant point: ‘Despite being right across the Bay of 
Bengal from Sri Lanka, not to mention the proximity of 
Burma and hailand, there is not a single written trace 
of inluence of Pali Buddhism. On the contrary, we have 
evidence for the study and use of a variety of Sans krit texts, 
both Mah āyānasūtras and Tantras’.
64. Isaacson and Sferra ( 2014 : 70–71, n. 51) note that while 
it has become standard practice to prefer the form Ati śa 
(from Ati śaya?), the form At īśa is just as problematic; they 
venture the speculation that the latter might be a corrup-
tion or ‘transformation’ of Adh īśa, which has the merit of 
being attested as a name or epithet. Kano ( 2016 : 83, n. 2) 
refers to an interlinear gloss in a Tibetan manuscr ipt from 
the unpublished Tanjur Canon  by Üpa losel (ca. 1270 –1355), 
reading a dhe  [or rhe] śa.
65. hus according to Newman ( 1991: 72–73), who identi-
ies Suvarṇadvīpa with Java rather than Sumatra, whereas 
according to Skilling ( 1997 : 190) the actual site might have 
been Kedah (contrast Schoterman, this volume, and Kan-
dahjaya 2014 ). he Blue Annals  assert that Pi ṇḍo (perhaps 
standing for paiṇḍapātika, a monk living on alms?) hailed 
from the Southern Seas, and was a disciple of Gser gling pa 
of Suvarṇadvīpa (Gnoli and Oro ino 2006 : 67). On Atīśa’s 
(largely imaginative) account of his eventful oceanic 
journey to Suvar ṇadvīpa, see Decleer 1995.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   19 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 20] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 20
1019 founded a Buddhist temple in N ākappaṭṭiṉam 
(Skilling 1997, 2007 ). Van der Kuijp ( 2003 : 420, n. 
6) identiies this Dharmak īrti with the author of a 
commentary to the Hevajratantra  (Netravibha ṅga, 
Tōh. 1191). Both Atīśa and Dharmak īrti were fervent 
devotees of T ārā, a deity that was popular in insular 
Southeast Asia. 
A renewed focus on Esoteric Buddhism, no 
doubt triggered by royal patronage, can be detected 
between the 10th and 12th centuries in polities of 
mainland Southeast Asia, including the domains 
of the Cams along the Vietnamese littorals. Chut-
iwongs (2006 ) discusses information concerning 
the construction of a shrine to Heruka in Camp ā 
by Śrī Sūryavarmadeva towards the end of the 12th 
century, during Khmer occupation. he sanctuaries 
of Phimai and Si hep, as well as several temples 
built at Angkor under the reign of Jayavarman 
VII, attest to Tantric iconographic programmes, 
as do the numerous bronze statues unearthed in 
the region.66 he temple of Abeyadana (late 11th 
century) at Bagan displays Tantric features, argu-
ably as the result of contemporary religious links 
and marital relations between the rulers of Bagan 
and those of Pa ṭṭikerā in Bengal.67 As suggested 
66. For an up-to-date, synthetic overview of Esoteric 
Buddhism at Phimai, and in the Khmer domains in gen eral, 
see Conti 2014 ; on Angkorean sites such as Si hep, Angkor 
hom, the Bayon, Banteay Chhmar, etc., see the studies by 
Woodward ( 1981, 2012 ) and Sharrock ( 2006 , 2007 , 2009 , 
2011a, 2012 , 2013a, 2013b). he Vajrayāna character of the 
Sab Bāk inscription of ad 1067  (K. 1158), recovered near 
Nakhon Ratchasima, has been discussed by Prapandvid ya 
(1990 ), Sinclair ( 2012), and Conti ( 2014 ). Besides mentioning 
the Guhyasam āja and betraying knowledge of that system, 
the inscription echoes a ‘signature verse’ by V āgīśvarakīrti, 
a Guhyasam āja-exegete who lourished in eastern India 
in the early 11th century (see Szántó forthcoming, who 
argues that V āgīśvarakīrti might have been the paramagu -
ru (guru’s guru)  of Vraḥ Dhanus, the author of the verse).
67. Abeyadana, the chief queen of King Kyanzittha (r. 
1084 –1112), was believed to hail from Bengal, and to be a 
follower of Mantranaya Buddhism. Kyanzittha’s son, King 
Alaungsitthu (r. 1113–67), married a queen from Pa ṭṭikerā, 
which was an important centre of worship of the ierce 
goddess Cund ā; Burmese literature and folk drama have 
preserved a memory of the romantic a fair between the 
prince of Pa ṭṭikerā and Kyanzittha’s only daughter (S. Bhat -
tacharya 1994 : 264–65). Much controversy exists around 
the Buddhist sect of the Aris (or Araññav āsins), which is 
described by 18th and 19th century Myanmar chronicles by Bautze-Picron ( 2014 b: 107), images found at the 
Sumatran sites of Padang Lawas are integrated in 
a network that connects them to South Asia, East 
Java, Central Sumatra, Cambodia and Camp ā in 
the 11th and 13th centuries; overall, the sites show a 
kind of Buddhism that belongs to the same phase of 
Vajrayāna as what was present in Khmer and Cam 
domains between the 12th and 13th centuries, and 
in East Java and China in the 13th century, ‘when 
esoteric Buddhism was tightly intertwined with 
politics and when ierce characters like Mah ākāla 
or Heruka/Hevajra were made the protectors of 
various kingdoms’ (ibid.: 123).68 he wild, ferocious 
character of the Esoteric Buddhist (and Tantric 
Śaiva) iconography that developed at the East Ja-
vanese courts of Ka ḍiri-Siṅhasāri and Majapahit69 
and scant epigraphic sources as a congregation of ‘ debased’ 
monks devoted to sex, alcohol, dance and animal sacri-
ice, and worshipping local spirits ( nat) and Hindu deities. 
Some scholars, such as Duroiselle, Ray and Luce, consid-
ered them followers of Tantric cults, whereas han Tun 
(and most contemporary specialists of Myanmar) regard 
them as having little if anything to do with Tantrism (see 
S. Bhattacharya 1994 ). Championing the latter school of 
thought, Bautze-Picron ( 2003 : 121–23, 199, 226 nn. 69, 70) 
has cast doubt on the view, advanced by earlier scholars 
mainly on account of the sexual nature of some of their 
friezes, that the Hpayathonzu ( 12th century) and Nanda-
manya (13th century) temples at Bagan were informed by 
a Tantric iconographic agenda. Further research is needed 
to clarify this issue.
68. he Hevajratantra  appears to have enjoyed some 
popularity in Sumatra (and, conversely, Suvar ṇadvīpa 
is mentioned by this text: see Schoterman this volume, 
p. 115). Besides the circumstantial evidence mentioned 
above attributing to Dharmak īrti from Suvar ṇadvīpa the 
authorship of a commentary to the Hevajra , and the epi-
graphic evidence presented by Gri iths (2014 c), must be 
considered the inscription of Saruaso II, which praises 
the crown prince Ana ṅgavarman, son of Ādityavarman, 
the last line of which mentions his ‘daily meditation on 
Hevajra’ ( Hevajra-nity āsmṛtiḥ). It would thus seem that 
Ādityavarman was following the same ideology and rit ual 
technology adopted earlier by Kublai Khan and K ṛtana -
gara, who equated themselves to the central deity of the 
maṇḍalas of Buddhist Tantras such as the Guhyasam āja or 
the Hevajra  (see Hunter in Kozok 2015: 324–27; Bautze-Pi-
cron 2014 b; Reichle 2009 : 139; O’Brien 1993). 
69. Besides the statuary and architectural vestiges, 
14th-century Old Javanese literary sources, such as the 
kakavin Sutasoma , attest to Esoteric Buddhist cults. In his 
Deśavarṇana (80.1) Prapañca refers to the existence of two 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   20 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 21] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 21
shares features with the Sumatran one, as attest-
ed in Biaro Bahal and Muara Takus, and in the 
Mahākāla statue attributed to Ādityavarman. he 
wrathful deity Hevajra and his Heruka instantia-
tion are represented in a number of Khmer bronzes 
(Lobo 1994 ), and perhaps made into cult objects at 
Banteay Chhmar and other sanctuaries (Sharrock 
2006 , 2013a; Conti 2014 : 273–77; contrast Green 
2013), while Tantric Yogin īs prominently feature at 
the Bayon and Phimai (Sharrock 2013b). Heruka/
Hevajra was part of the royal cults of the Mongol 
Khans (Bade, this volume), while Mah ākāla was 
worshipped by the elites of the Dali kingdom in 
Yunnan (Bryson 2012). 
It may be argued that the ierce, military-orient -
ed iconography of Phase Two and hree of Esoteric 
Buddhism represents an ‘antagonistic paradigm’ 
relecting socio-political contingencies. his par-
adigm, recently revisited by Verardi ( 2011), posits a 
hostility or antagonism between the two religions 
as relected in either actual historical events, such 
as various forms of competition for royal support, 
devotees and resources, occasional interethnic 
or interreligious violence, or iconographic rep-
resentations, such as Śaiva gods being trampled 
upon or subdued by Buddhist deities, and vice versa . 
Whereas modern scholarship o ten emphasizes the 
‘inclusive’ and ‘syncretic’ character of Buddhism, 
whether or not in its esoteric varieties, in many 
Asian contexts, much of the extant textual and 
archaeological evidence points to the existence of 
a clear divide between Buddhism and competing 
religious systems, at least in elite milieux (see, e. g., 
Miksic 2010 ).70 Having said that, it is beyond doubt 
types of private Buddhist institutions, namely kavinayan 
and a (more prevalent) kabajradharan, and associates  a 
locale named buḍur (Borobudur?) with the latter type of 
establishment (for a synthesis of relevant secondary liter a-
ture, see Sinclair 2012 ). he Tantric legacy of Si ṅhasāri and 
Majapahit appears to have been preserved by the Sanskrit 
sources used by Balinese Buddhist ritualists, which  include 
fragments from several authoritative works of the Ma-
hāyāna and Vajray āna: Śāntideva’s Bodhicary āvatāra, the 
Sarvadurgatipari śodhana, and Advayavajra’s Kudṛṣṭinir-
ghāṭana (Hooykaas 1973: 600–603). 
70. It goes without saying that in lay milieux the bound ar-
ies tend to become more porous, and lay devotion di splays 
an inclusive attitude in many cultural contexts. Even so, 
I reiterate my argument that the (imprecise) category of that certain regional contingencies and personal 
idiosyncrasies favoured the formation of actual syn -
cretic cults uniting doctrinal and ritual elements 
pertaining to distinct traditions—a paradigmatic 
case being the ‘ Śiva-Buddha cult’ inaugurated by, 
and revolving around the igure of, East Javanese 
king Kṛtanagara (r. 1268 –92), who leaned towards 
Esoteric Buddhism while at the same time patron-
ised Tantric Śaivism.71
Unfavourable international political develop-
ments, and most notably the decline of Buddhism in 
northern India, may have triggered the rise of new 
networks at the turn of the 13th century. N ālandā 
and Vikrama śīla having been razed, scholars and 
artisans led to Nepal and Tibet (von Schroeder 
1981: 311), and possibly further a ield to Southeast 
Asia.72 A Nepalese (Newar) in luence on the Khmer 
architecture of that period has been noted by Fillio -
zat (1969 : 47) and Sharrock ( 2007 : 252); as pointed 
out by O’Brien (this volume), a diaspora of Newar 
artisans existed in the Sino-Tibetan sphere, and 
these artisans became popular at Khubilai Khan’s 
court at a time that coincides with the reign of 
Kṛtanagara, Khubilai’s Javanese adversary, and 
the patron of Candi Jago. Northeastern Indian or 
Newar elements have long since been noted in the 
statuary and decorative features of East Javanese 
Buddhist art;73 similarly, the N āgarī-inscribed Bud -
‘syncretism’ has o ten been (and continues to be) misused; 
cf. Estève 2009 . 
71. For a reevaluation of this cult in the East Javanese 
Siṅhasāri context, see Hunter 2007  and, for an added dis-
cussion on Majapahit and Bali, Acri 2015. A Bhairavika 
priest and other categories of Śaiva clergymen as well as 
mainstream Brahmans are mentioned in the Mula Maluru ṅ 
inscription associated with K ṛtanagara (see Sidomulyo 
2010 : 107–8).
72. Tāranātha states that most of the Buddhist scholars 
of madhyade śa led to mainland Southeast Asia (i.e., the 
kingdoms of Pegu, Camp ā, Kamboja, etc.) a ter Magadha 
was invaded by the Turks (D. Chattopadhyaya 1980 : 330).
73. See O’Brien 1993: 252–55, this volume. Schoterman 
(1994 : 168) noted that the ive main statues of Bodhisattvas 
at Candi Jago were executed according to the teachings of 
the Sanskrit Amoghap āśasādhana , which was written by 
Śākyaśrībhadra in northern India around the year 1200 , 
and may have reached Java shortly therea ter. Lunsingh 
Scheurleer ( 2008 : 296–98) underlines the northeastern 
Indian in luence on a sculpture of Java in the Si ṅhasāri 
period and also of Sumatra in ad 1286  by Kṛtanagara, 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   21 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 22] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 22
dhist statues from Candi Jago, and the occurrence 
of the words bharāla (‘god’) and bharālī (‘goddess’) 
in a number of inscriptions associated with K ṛtan-
agara, support a possible northeastern Indian, and 
especially Newar, link.74 
summary  of the contributions
In dealing with various aspects and traditions of Es -
oteric Buddhism and intra-Asian maritime connec -
tions from the 7th to the 13th century, the fourteen 
essays in this volume are not grouped according 
to strictly chronological or geographical criteria, 
but follow a thematic and disciplinary arrange-
ment, under the three headings of ‘Monks, Texts, 
Patrons’ (Part I), ‘Art, Architecture, and Material 
Culture’ (Part II), and ‘Bauddha- Śaiva Dynamics’ 
(Part III). Rather than focusing uniquely on re-
gion-speci ic manifestations of Esoteric Buddhism, 
whether bound to modern nation-states or not, this 
volume embraces a perspective emphasizing the 
(maritime) intra-Asian interactions—also intend -
ed as the dialectic encounters between cultures 
and religions, doctrines and practices, and their 
human carriers —that occurred across geographical 
and cultural boundaries in the course of several 
centuries. Within this framework, it reveals the 
limits of a historiography that is premised on  land-
based, ‘northern’ pathways of transmission of ( es-
oteric varieties of ) Buddhism across the Eurasian 
continent, and advances an alternative—actually, 
complementary—historical narrative that takes the 
‘southern’ pathways, i.e. the sea-based networks, 
into due account. In harmony with this perspective, 
several studies in the present collection focus on 
what is now the Indonesian Archipelago—a stra-
tegic geographical area that has yielded signi icant 
which was reconsecrated around the mid 14th century by 
Ādityavarman (cf. Reichle 2007 : 56f). 
74. See Lokesh Chandra 1983, Kandahjaya 2004 : 68–69, 
Sinclair 2012 , and Griiths 2014 c, who discuss the attes-
tation of the word forms  bharāla and bharālī and their 
probable  cognates  bahāla, bahāra and bharāḍa (<bhaṭṭāra[-
ka], as suggested by Lienhard 1999 : 38) in Newar sources. 
While these synchronic linguistic facts do not necessarily 
demonstrate the existence of direct links, they nonethe-
less suggest that analogous religious developments were 
probably taking place in di ferent locales of late mediaeval 
Buddhist Asia. vestiges of its glorious Buddhist past, yet is still 
underrepresented in contemporary scholarship.
Capitalizing on recent Buddhological research, 
the essays integrate and link together perspectives 
from various disciplines (philology, history, art 
history, archaeology, and religious studies) and 
area-studies expertise. Concomitantly, a number of 
studies deal with textual materials in various pre-
modern languages. his relects the ongoing e fort 
to lay a solid foundation upon which theoretical 
and historical analysis could rest, especially given 
the sheer amount of primary sources, in the form 
of manuscripts and inscriptions, which urgently 
await to be catalogued, edited, and studied. 
Following on the main themes set out in this 
introductory Chapter 1, Part I explores a para-
mount aspect of intra-Asian interactions, namely 
the circulation of monks and texts. his aspect is 
inextricably linked to the adoption (and adaptation ) 
of Esoteric Buddhist cults and rituals by the con-
temporary ruling elites, which form the primary 
focus of its two concluding chapters. 
Chapter 2, ‘Coronation and Liberation Ac-
cording to a Javanese Monk in China: Bianhong’s 
Manual on the abhiṣeka of a cakravartin’, by Iain 
Sinclair addresses the links between 8th-century 
Tang China and insular Southeast Asia. It exam-
ines a key igure in the transmission of Vajray āna 
lineages between the Javanese and Sinitic worlds, 
namely a monk known by his Chinese name Bi-
anhong, who in the 8th century travelled from his 
native island of Java to the Tang capital to study 
Esoteric Buddhism under Huiguo, one of Amogha -
vajra’s pupils. he chapter includes an edition and 
annotated translation of the sole work attributed 
to him, the Ritual Manual for Initiation into the 
Great Maṇḍala of the U ṣṇīṣa-Cakravartin . Sinclair 
argues that the Manual  embodies the interest in 
conversion and state protection shared by other 
Esoteric Buddhist masters moving through South, 
East and Southeast Asia at the time.
he islands of Java and Sumatra and their over-
seas connections provide the setting of the next 
two chapters. Hudaya Kandahjaya’s ‘ Saṅ H y aṅ 
Kamahāyānikan , Borobudur, and the Origins 
of Esoteric Buddhism in Premodern Indonesia’ 
(Chapter 3) focuses on the pre 10th century San-
skrit-Old Javanese Esoteric Buddhist compendium 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   22 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 23] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 23
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan . Having discussed the 
relationship of this unique scripture with Esoteric 
Buddhist texts in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese, 
Kandahjaya provides preliminary answers to some 
key questions concerning its date and doctrinal 
inspiration, the milieu of its authorship, and its 
relationship with the Central Javanese Buddhist 
monument Borobudur. His analysis reveals that 
this text, which contains early esoteric material of 
possible northeastern Indian provenance, played 
an important role in the development of Esoteric 
Buddhist traditions in Indonesia; concomitantly,  
data from the Archipelago cast new light on the 
genesis of Esoteric Buddhism across the Buddhist 
cosmopolis, suggesting that the development of 
esoteric teachings could have occurred earlier than 
has been hitherto assumed.
Chapter 4 (‘Traces of Indonesian In luences in 
Tibet’) is an English translation by Roy Jordaan 
and Mark Long of a too rarely cited Dutch essay 
published as the pamphlet Indonesische Sporen 
in Tibet in 1986  by Jan Schoterman (d. 1989). his 
short yet seminal essay merits a re-edition and 
English translation insofar that it discusses the 
fascinating, and understudied, links between the 
Sumatran kingdom of Śrīvijaya and Tibet in the 
light of the accounts of the lives of famous Buddhis t 
monks—such as At īśa—and other primary sources 
in Sanskrit and Tibetan. 
he two concluding chapters of Part I focus on 
the crucial issue of Esoteric Buddhism and royal 
sponsorship against the background of intra-Asian 
connections. Geo frey Goble’s ‘ he Politics of 
Esoteric Buddhism: Amoghavajra and the Tang 
State’ (Chapter 5) focuses on the incorporation of 
Esoteric Buddhism in the bureaucratic imperial 
state of 8th century Tang China.  Taking this as 
a case study, he suggests that the spread of early 
Esoteric Buddhism in Maritime Asia was driven by 
the tradition’s guiding ethos of hegemony, control, 
and power and its consequent appeal to members 
of the ruling class .
he prominently historiographical Chapter 6, 
‘(Spi)ritual Warfare in 13th-Century Asia? Inter-
national Relations, the Balance of Powers, and the 
Tantric Buddhism of K ṛtanagara and Khubilai 
Khan’, by David Bade examines the connections 
between, and explanations proposed for, the Tantric Buddhism and political actions of East Javanese 
ruler Kṛtanagara and the Mongol Khubilai Khan in 
light of recent scholarship on Tantric developments 
in the Buddhist world of the 13th century, as well 
as Rosenstock-Huessy’s theory of religion. 
In Part II we shit to the realm of the visual 
arts, architecture, and material culture within the 
context of intra-Asian connections. Its six chap-
ters consider the circulation of Esoteric Buddhist 
iconography and architectural motifs between 
South and Southeast Asia, from the disciplinary 
perspective of art history and archaeology. 
he irst four chapters are set against the 
back ground of north- and southeastern India. 
his extensive geographical area, which includes 
Bangladesh and the modern Indian states of Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal, has been rec-
ognized as one of the cradles of Esoteric Buddhism, 
and in general as a major source of inspiration for 
the arts of Tibet and Southeast Asia. he discussion 
is opened by Claudine Bautze-Picron in Chapter 7, 
‘Images of Devotion and Power in South and South-
east Bengal’, which focuses on Esoteric Buddhist 
art, and in particular on images of the Buddha and 
other Buddhist deities, in eastern India from the 
8th up to the 12th century. Bautze-Picron examines 
such diferent types of production as stone, terra-
cotta, stucco or cast images, manuscript illumina-
tions, cloth-paintings and murals, and sees them as 
relecting contemporary religious values and daily 
concerns, as well as historical and socio-political 
factors—including the relationship between Bud -
dhism, Brahmanism, and political power.
Swati Chemburkar’s ‘Borobudur’s P āla Fore-
bear? A Field Note from Kesariya, Bihar, India’ 
(Chapter 8) continues this line of enquiry, address-
ing the ‘paradigm-shi t’ in Buddhist texts, ritual 
and sacred architecture brought about by the rise 
of the Pāla dynasty in 8th century Eastern India, 
which sent cultural waves across the expanding 
maritime and land trade routes of Asia. Chembur-
kar focuses on architectural breakthroughs, and 
argues that the design of a circular mountain stūpa 
of Buddhas at Kesariya (Bihar) was the precedent 
that made possible the celebrated and much more 
elaborate structure of Borobudur in Java. 
Natasha Reichle’s ‘Imagery, Ritual, and Ide-
ology: Examining the Mah āvihāra at Ratnagiri’ 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   23 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 24] ---
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia 24
(Chapter 9) investigates another important Bud-
dhist site of Eastern India, namely the main mon-
astery of Ratnagiri in Odisha. Having elaborated on 
the Mahāyāna roots of the monastery and the later 
esoteric developments, Reichle notes that aspects o f 
the esoteric iconography found at Ratnagiri are als o 
seen at temple sites in Java and Sumatra, and may 
relect similarities in the development of religious 
practices across insular Southeast Asia. 
In Chapter 10, ‘Seeds of Vajrabodhi: Buddhist 
Ritual Bronzes from Java and Khorat’, Peter Shar-
rock and Emma Bunker trace a link between 
Eastern India and the Khmer Khorat plateau via 
the Malay Peninsula. Expanding on recent research 
focused on the role of Vajrabodhi in spreading 
esoteric teachings across the Buddhist ecumene, 
the authors argue that the little-known Buddhist 
bronzes from Khorat are part of the same cross-cul -
tural expansion of Esoteric Buddhism over the 
seas between India and China that opened with 
Vajrabodhi’s momentous journey.
he concluding two chapters of Part II are set 
in Sumatra and East Java respectively—two locales 
that, as we have seen in previous chapters, were 
at the heart of a thick web of overseas religious, 
economic, and diplomatic networks. Chapter 11, 
‘Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism 
in Sumatra, 7th to 13th Century’, by John Miksic 
presents an overview of recent archaeological 
discoveries of vajra s and inscribed gold objects 
in Sumatra and under the water near the island. 
hese discoveries, as well as Sumatra’s rich herit-
age of Buddhist monuments, lend support to the 
hypothesis that this area was a signi icant centre 
of Esoteric Buddhist activity during an important 
phase of the genesis and growth of that religious 
orientation, and that several streams of Buddhist 
thought and practice coexisted in various areas of 
the island for more than half a millennium.
Kate O’Brien’s ‘ he Tale of Sudhana and Mano -
harā on Candi Jago: An Interpretation of a Series 
of Narrative Bas-reliefs on a 13th-Century East Ja-
vanese Monument’ (Chapter 12) focuses on some 
narrative reliefs at the temple of Jago, the Buddhi st 
shrine commissioned in ad 1268  by King K ṛta-
nagara. She proposes that an unidenti ied series of 
reliefs represent the tale of the Bodhisattva prince 
Sudhana and the kinnarī princess Manohar ā, which on the one hand accords with the ma ṇḍalic pro-
gramme of the shrine, and on the other re lects 
the Esoteric Buddhist ideal of kingship embraced 
by Kṛtanagara (and, perhaps, by his contemporary 
rival Khubilai Khan). 
Part III comprises three chapters that add an 
important dimension to the discussion, namely 
the relationship between the cognate religious and 
ritual systems of Esoteric Buddhism and Tantric 
Śaivism. Coexisting in  many contexts,  yet oten ri-
valling each other, these two traditions  contributed 
to shape the religious discourse across Maritime 
Asia in the mediaeval period, giving rise to phe-
nomena of hybridity, dialectics, appropriation, or 
antagonism. 
he irst two essays primarily analyse sets of 
textual and archaeological evidence from Java, 
linking them to contemporary developments in 
overseas regions. In Chapter 13, ‘Once More on 
the ‘‘Ratu Boko Mantra’’: Magic, Realpolitik, and 
Bauddha- Śaiva Dynamics in Ancient Nusantara’, 
I build on the work of previous scholars on the 
Esoteric Buddhist mantra in Sanskrit inscribed 
on a circa 8th-century gold foil recovered from 
the Ratu Boko prominence in Central Java, and 
identify two hitherto unnoticed attestations of it in 
two sources from Bali—one in a Sanskrit Buddhist 
hymn (the Pañcakāṇḍa), the other in a Sanskrit-Old 
Javanese Śaiva text (the Gaṇapatitattva ). hrough 
an analysis of related textual sources from the 
Indian Subcontinent and East Asia, my study casts 
new light on the context and function of the Ratu 
Boko artefact, and elaborates on the religious and 
socio-political scenarios opened up by it.
Jefrey Sundberg’s ‘Mid- 9th-Century Adversity 
for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java: 
Lord Kumbhayoni and the ‘Rag-wearer’ Paṁsukū-
lika Monks of the Abhayagirivih āra’ (Chapter 14) 
examines the relationship between two chronolog -
ically and thematically distinct sets of late 8th- to 
early 9th-century lithic structures and inscriptions 
at the southern end of the Ratu Boko promontory in 
Central Java: the irst is Buddhist and relates to the 
Sinhalese monks of the famous Abhayagirivih āra, 
the second is Śaiva and is connected to the Java-
nese nobleman Pu Kumbhayoni. he essay seeks to 
ofer a plausible narrative about how the Bauddhas 
and the Śaivas intersected in ad 856 on that small 
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   24 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 25] ---
Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Routes 25
patch of Central Java, arguing that the Ratu Boko 
archaeological remains mirror an important event 
in the course of Buddhism in Asia: the emphatic ad 
854 reversion of Sinhalese Buddhist kings from the 
Mantranaya to the heravāda in the wake of the 
traumatic sacking of Anur ādhapura a ter a circa 
840 battle seemingly fought in the grounds of the 
Abhayagiri itself. Sundberg points out that the loss 
of Sri Lanka was part of the dimming of prospects 
and support for Esoteric Buddhists across Asia in 
the same decade. he appended Annex, ‘Further 
Considerations of the Ratu Boko Mantra’, o fers 
additional insights on the inscribed gold foil dis-
cussed by myself in Chapter 13.
In the inal Chapter 15, ‘A Śaiva Text in Chinese 
Garb? An Annotated Translation of the Suji liyan 
Moxishouluo tian shuo aweishe fa ’, by Rolf Giebel we 
return to Tang China. Giebel takes up he (Garuḍa) 
Āveśa Rite Explained by the God Mahe śvara Which 
Switly Establishes Its E icacy, being a Chinese 
translation, attributed to Amoghavajra, of an un-
identiied original (South Asian?) Sanskrit source. 
his text, the greater part of which describes the use 
of child mediums in rites of spirit possession for the 
purpose of divination, would seem to be entirely 
devoid of any Buddhist content; given the many 
elements belonging to the G āruḍa strand of Tantric 
Śaiva literature, this source may be indeed regarded as a Śaiva text in Chinese Esoteric Buddhist garb.
he volume is closed by two Appendices. Appen -
dix A, ‘he Names of N āgabuddhi and Vajrabud-
dhi’ by Iain Sinclair, makes a persuasive argument 
in support of a reinterpretation of the names of 
the famous Esoteric Buddhist masters popularly 
known as ‘N āgabodhi’ and ‘Vajrabodhi’. Appendix 
B, ‘Notes on the Alleged Reading vālaputra  on the 
Pikatan Funeral Stele’ by Je frey Sundberg, engages 
with de Casparis’ reading on the Śivagṛha Central 
Javanese inscription, which bears on the hypothesis  
of an end to Buddhist Śailendra rule in Java.
he collective body of work presented in this 
volume highlights the important role played by Es-
oteric Buddhism in shaping maritime intra-Asian 
connectivity from the 7th century onwards, and 
in inluencing many cultural aspects of the local 
and cosmopolitan societies throughout Buddhist 
Asia to the 13th century and beyond. he result -
ing perspective contributes to transcend—in fact, 
overturn—the still dominant paradigm regarding 
Esoteric Buddhism as a marginal, or even aber-
rant and degenerate, phenomenon as opposed to 
mainstream heravāda and Mah āyāna Buddhism 
in many Asian contexts.  Indeed, one may even say 
that by the 10th century, Esoteric Buddhism had 
virtually become identical with ‘Buddhist practice’ 
throughout much of Asia.
Intro 17-3-16 big map.indd   25 11/9/16   9:14 pm

--- [Page 26] ---
Acknowledgements                      ix
List of Abbreviations                        xi
Conventions                    xiii
āone8oldstyle. Introduction: Esoteric Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk Ro utes,  
7th–āone8oldstyle3th Century ad                      āone8oldstyle
Andrea Acri
PART I: MONKS, TEXTS, PATRON S
2. Coronation and Liberation According to a Javanese Monk in China:  
Bianhong’s Manual on the abhi/uni1E63eka of a cakravartin                 29
Iain Sinclair
3.  Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan , Borobudur, and the Origins of  Esoteric Buddhism  
in Indonesia                               67
Hudaya Kandahjaya
4. Traces of Indonesian In luences in Tibet                       āone8oldstyleāone8oldstyle3 
Jan A. Schoterman          
5. he Politics of Esoteric Buddhism: Amoghavajra and the Tang State               āone8oldstyle23
Geofrey Goble
6. (Spi)ritual Warfare in āone8oldstyle3th-Century Asia? International Relations, the Balance  
of Powers, and the Tantric Buddhism of K ṛtanagara and Khubilai Khan                  āone8oldstyle4āone8oldstyle
David Bade
PART II: ART, ARCHITECTUR E , AND MATER IAL CULTUR E 
7. Images of Devotion and Power in South and Southeast Bengal                        āone8oldstyle63
Claudine Bautze-PicronCONTENTS
table of contents.indd   1 16/8/16   9:50 AM

--- [Page 27] ---
viii Contents
8. Borobudur’s P āla Forebear? A Field Note from Kesariya, Bihar, India                           āone8oldstyle9āone8oldstyle 
Swati Chemburkar
9. Imagery, Ritual, and Ideology: Examining the Mah āvihāra at Ratnagiri                        2āone8oldstyleāone8oldstyle 
Natasha Reichle
āone8oldstyle0. Seeds of Vajrabodhi: Buddhist Ritual Bronzes from Java and Khorat                  237 
Peter D. Sharrock & Emma C. Bunker
āone8oldstyleāone8oldstyle. Archaeological Evidence for Esoteric Buddhism in Sumatra,  
7th to āone8oldstyle3th Century                      253
John Miksic
āone8oldstyle2. he Tale of Sudhana and Manohar ā on Candi Jago: An Interpretation of a  
Series of Narrative Bas-reliefs on a āone8oldstyle3th-Century East Javanese Monument              275
Kate O’Brien
PART III: BAUDDHA -ŚAIV A DYNAMICS
āone8oldstyle3. Once More on the ‘Ratu Boko Mantra’: Magic, Realpolitik, and Bauddha- Śaiva  
Dynamics in Ancient Nusantara                              323
Andrea Acri
āone8oldstyle4. Mid-9th-Century Adversity for Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Ja va:  
Lord Kumbhayoni and the ‘Rag-wearer’ Paṁsukūlika Monks  
of the Abhayagirivih āra                 349
Jefrey R. Sundberg
āone8oldstyle5. A Śaiva Text in Chinese Garb? An Annotated Translation of the  
Suji liyan Moxishouluo tian shuo aweishe fa                    38āone8oldstyle
Rolf W. Giebel
APPENDIX A: he Names of N āgabuddhi and Vajrabuddhi              389
Iain Sinclair
APPENDIX B: Notes on the Alleged Reading vālaputra  on the Pikatan Funeral Stele         393
Jefrey R. Sundberg 
he Contributors                  395
Bibliography                    399
Index                          44āone8oldstyle
table of contents.indd   8 16/8/16   9:50 AM

--- [Page 28] ---
ESOTERIC BUDDHISM IN  
MEDIAEVAL MARITIME ASIA
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons
Edited by
ANDREA ACRI
Front Matter.indd   3 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 29] ---
First published in Singapore in 2016  by ISEAS Publishing
ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute
30 Heng Mui Keng Terrace
Singapore 119614
E-mail : publish@iseas.edu.sg
Website : http://bookshop.iseas.edu.sg
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reprodu ced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic , mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute.
© 2016  ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute
he responsibility for facts and opinions in this publication rests e xclusively with the authors and their 
interpretations do not necessarily re lect the views or the policy of the publishers or their supporters.
ISEAS Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia : Networks of Masters, Texts , Icons / edited by 
Andrea Acri.
1. Buddhism—Asia. 
I. Acri, Andrea, 1981–
BQ266 E77  2016
ISBN 978-981-4695 -08-4 (sot cover)
ISBN 978-981-4695 -09-1 (e-book, PDF)
Cover image : c. 9th century seated Vajrap āṇi statue from Central Java; gi t of John and Evelyn Kossak, /T_he 
Kronos Collections, 1984 . Photo courtesy of /T_he Metropolitan Museum of Art (www.metmuseum.org)
Typeset by Andrea Acri
Printed in Singapore by Mainland Press Pte Ltd
Front Matter.indd   4 17/8/16   10:42 PM

--- [Page 30] ---
