--- [Page 1] ---
2618
REVISITING THE CULT OF 
“ŚIV A-BUDDHA” IN JA V A AND 
BALI
Andrea Acri
INTRODUCTION
As testiied to by the extant written sources and archaeological remains, 
Śivaism was the dominant religion in Java and Bali. However, Śivaism 
coexisted alongside Buddhism for more than a millennium, from circa  
the ifth century CE through the late ifteenth century in Java, and on 
Bali until today.1 The coexistence of the two religions eventually gave 
rise to phenomena of confrontation, dialectic and integration that have 
attracted scholarly attention since the late nineteenth century. The most 
inluential studies have sanctioned the view that the variety of “Hinduism” 
widespread in Java and Bali was fundamentally syncretic in character, 
forming a blend of Śaiva and Bauddha elements. What has been generally 
termed the “religion of Śiva-Buddha” or “Hindu-Buddhist religion” (in 
Indonesian Agama Siwa-Buda  or Agama Hindu-Buda ), and ascribed to 
the Hindu-Buddhist era ( jaman Hindu-Buda ) of Javanese history, has been 
characterized mostly in terms of “identity”, “syncretism”, “parallelism” 
or “coalition”. Whether the emphasis be laid on equality, integration 
or symbiosis between the two systems, their respective deities or their 
paramount goals, the dynamics shaping the resulting “cult of Śiva-Buddha” 
have often been regarded as having been subjected to distinctive local Reproduced from Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia,   
edited by D. Christian Lammerts (Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2015). This version was 
obtained electronically direct from the publisher on condition that copyright is not infringed. No part of this 
publication may be reproduced without the prior permission of the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.  
Individual articles are available at < http://bookshop.iseas.edu.sg >. 

--- [Page 2] ---
262 Andrea Acri
features that set this tradition apart from the more rigidly sectarian South 
Asian traditions from which it originated.2
Even though our understanding of (Tantric) Śivaism and (Tantric) 
Buddhism in the Indian Subcontinent and Tibet has improved dramatically 
over the last two decades, the majority of the most recent studies touching 
upon these religious traditions in Indonesia appear to be insuficiently 
aware of these developments. It seems thus worthwhile to discuss once 
again the relationship between Śivaism and Buddhism in the Subcontinent 
and in the Archipelago from a comparative perspective, in the hope that 
this approach will stimulate a cross-fertilization between the disciplines 
of Indology and Indonesian studies.
The basic idea that my paper tries to convey is that the nature of the 
equation of the paramount principles of Śivaism and Buddhism as expressed 
by a number of Old Javanese sources from the Singhasari-Majapahit 
period has not always been correctly grasped, and that alleged instances 
of “Javanese syncretism” should now be challenged.
SURVEYING THE APPROACHES TO THE JA V ANO-
BALINESE “ŚIV A-BUDDHA RELIGION”
The ‘identity’ paradigm was at irst formulated by Kern.3 On account 
of his reading of the Old Javanese Kakawin Sutasoma  by Mpu Tantular 
(c.fourteenth century CE), he suggested that in ancient Java there occurred 
a mixture or blending ( vermenging ) of Śiva and Buddha. As he based 
himself mostly on the comparison with Nepalese and Indian sources, he 
did not consider the Javanese local culture to have been an important factor 
in shaping this situation. This view was supported by Krom4 on the basis 
of iconographical evidence, but adjusted by Rassers5 who, although still 
endorsing the term “blending”, explained it in terms of local background 
and ancestral myths of the Malayo-Polinesian tribe, especially as relected 
by the popular Balinese tale of Bubhukṣa and Gagaṅ Akiṅ.6 Both Krom7 
and Rassers8 alongside the term “blending” also used “syncretism”. Use 
of the term syncretism was endorsed by Zoetmulder,9 but was opposed 
by Pigeaud,10 who deined the relationship of Śivaism and Buddhism in 
Majapahit Java as “parallelism”. According to him, that dichotomous 
religious structure developed as a result of the classiicatory attitude and 
dualistic pattern of thought that were common features of the ancient 
Javanese culture.
Unsatisied with the previous perspectives, Gonda11 employed the term 
“coalition”, which from the point of view of theology implies a search for 
the same ultimate goal using different and distinct methods. To corroborate 

--- [Page 3] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  263
his theory, Gonda12 pointed at the occurrence of similar phenomena in Nepal 
and Cambodia, and showed that many Old Javanese sources equated not 
only Śiva with Buddha but also with the highest manifestation of truth 
belonging to several other schools as well. Gonda’s view was endorsed 
by Soebadio,13 according to whom this coalition involved no mixing of 
systems, but rather presupposed different ways to achieve the ultimate 
truth, just as two different paths lead towards the summit of a mountain. 
This idea was adopted also by Supomo,14 de Casparis15 and Santoso.16
A view somewhat closer to Pigeaud’s “parallelism” was elaborated by 
Ensink,17 who analysed Śivaism and Buddhism in Majapahit Java as a dual 
system based on the concept of bipolarity that is found in Javanese wayang 
puppetry as well as in the Indian tradition. Ensink also took account of 
the more recent Balinese tradition — and especially the aforementioned 
tale of Bubhukṣa and Gagaṅ Akiṅ irst analysed by Rassers — to show 
how the local people perceived the two religions: Śivaism was regarded 
to be the older system, while Buddhism the younger, yet the most perfect 
(or effective) one.
More than a decade later, Nihom18 challenged the assumption that 
the Śiva-Buddha coalition of Majapahit Java was a local distinguishing 
characteristic and — to an even greater extent than Kern and Gonda 
— emphasized data from the Indian Subcontinent. He argued that the 
admixture of Śaiva and Bauddha elements found in East Java has to be 
seen as a common feature of a signiicant part of Tantric Bauddha literature 
from the Subcontinent as well as Tibet, where it is virtually impossible 
to distinguish the Bauddha and Śaiva elements as separated and opposed.
In a recent groundbreaking article, Hunter19 has challenged the idea 
that the Lord Śiva-Buddha ( bhaṭāra śivabuddha ) often mentioned in 
Majapahit sources was part of an established syncretic religious system, 
arguing that such a situation was due to the politico-religious hegemony 
introduced by the ruler Kṛtanagara (r. 1265–92 CE), who was deiied as a 
form of both Śiva and Buddha. Hunter has further deined the “syncretism” 
documented in literary works and artistic remains of the Singhasari period 
of East Javanese history as a “series of initiatives undertaken by Kṛtanagara 
with the ultimate aim of forcing a fusion of elements that represented the 
metaphysical relection of his pragmatic political policies”.20
RECENT APPROACHES TO ŚAIV A-BAUDDHA 
DIALECTICS IN THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT
Considerable advancements in the understanding of Śivaism and Buddhism 
and their mutual relationship in the medieval Indian Subcontinent and 

--- [Page 4] ---
264 Andrea Acri
Tibet have been achieved in the last two decades or so, mostly thanks to 
the editing, translating and studying of various scriptures belonging to 
the vast corpus of nearly coeval Sanskrit and Tibetan textual materials 
related to the category of Tantra.21 What are now called Tantric Śivaism 
and Tantric Buddhism by scholars have turned out to share signiicant 
common elements, such as an interdependence of discourse in such 
disparate domains as philosophy, soteric practices, ritual and iconography. 
This complex phenomenon of mutual dialectic inluence, interchange and 
interdependence has triggered a wide range of etic interpretations, but three 
main hermeneutical models have come to dominate the scholarly debate.
The irst position, called “substratum model” by its main advocate 
David Seyfort Ruegg,22 posits an early “pan-Indian religious substratum” 
or common cultic stock — mainly constituted by “folk” religion — that 
would ex hypothesi  form the common source from which both Śaiva 
and Bauddha traditions derived, and to which they ultimately owe their 
shared common elements. Seyfort Ruegg questions that the two religions 
make sense as discrete and opposed entities “requiring to be kept neatly 
apart at all levels of analysis”.23 He further detects in the original textual 
sources the existence of the emic opposition between the categories of 
lokottara  and laukika , respectively “supra-mundane” and “mundane”. This 
contrastive structure distinguishes two superordinate dimensions within any 
manifestation of belief, ritual or conduct, where the lower one ( laukika ) 
is opposed in the sense of relative, inferior and subordinate to the higher 
one ( lokottara ), or ultimate.24
The “substratum model” has been criticized by Alexis Sanderson,25 
mainly on account of its being an abstract and unveriiable, i.e. inferred 
but never perceived, concept or entity. Sanderson himself has elaborated 
a paradigm that has been later labelled by his readers, and in particular 
by his main criticizer Seyfort Ruegg, “borrowing model”. Sanderson’s 
research on Sanskrit primary sources of the Śaiva Mantramārga and the 
Bauddha Yogatantra has highlighted the divide existing between the 
two traditions, and justiied the common elements on the grounds of a 
great deal of mutual inluences, or even manifest plagiarism, occurring 
between both systems — especially the incorporation of materials of the 
former, and arguably earlier, textual corpus into the latter. Sanderson has 
found strong evidence for incorporation of scriptures of the Śaiva canon 
into the Bauddha Yoganiruttaratantras, and has deined the origin of the 
dependence of Bauddha Yoginītantras on Śaiva scriptural sources as a 
“pious plagiarism” of the latter religion on the former.26 Furthermore, 

--- [Page 5] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  265
he has stressed the somewhat syncretic attitude of lay devotionalism, 
characterized by an “inclusivist” attitude that was equally followed in 
the Subcontinent as in the periphery, e.g., in Java and Cambodia.27 Rather 
than a simple opposition between laukika  and lokottara , Sanderson 
distinguishes in Śaiva texts an emic strategy of polemici zing with different 
religious and philosophical systems by placing them on a hierarchical 
scale as “lower level” truths.
In addition to the “substratum model” and the “borrowing model”, 
we can distinguish a third popular paradigm, which Seyfort Ruegg28 has 
called “agonistic view”, namely “a more or less secular and historicist 
interpretation of the schema as representing the agonistic or hostile relation 
‘Buddhism’ vs. ‘Hinduism’ in the world, i.e. in history”. According to this 
view, hostility or (ant)agonism between the two religions is relected in 
either actual historical events, such as various forms of competition for 
royal support, devotees and resources, occasional interreligious violence, 
or iconographic representations, such as Hindu gods being trampled upon 
or subdued by Buddhist deities, and vice versa.
The textual evidence presented and analysed in a persuasive manner 
by Sanderson makes the “borrowing model” an entirely plausible and 
effective hermeneutical tool. Whereas this standpoint seamlessly espouses 
the “agonistic model” insofar as it assumes the existence of a divide 
between the borrower and the source tradition, it may also be used 
alongside the “substratum model”. Notwithstanding his criticism of the 
model proposed by Sanderson, Seyfort Ruegg himself29 seems to have 
adopted a somewhat conciliating position when acknowledging that the two 
models are not necessarily exclusive of each other, for they can be applied 
to particular cases and, in any event, in order that the borrowing could 
take place meaningfully one has to suppose a shared ground represented 
by his postulated “common substratum”. This position is consonant with 
the attempt by Sferra30 to integrate the two models, pointing out that they 
both retain validity insofar as Śivaism and Buddhism share a
“common way of interpreting reality and of relating to it, which 
is expressed in a common soteriological strategy”. This common 
“substratum of beliefs and soteric practices” is the presupposition 
that allowed Buddhist authors to include passages or verses from 
non-dualist Hindu Tantras in their scriptures, and that permitted Hindu 
redactors to act in a similar way. Seen from such a perspective, this 
“substratum”, unlike the supposed substratum of the folk religion, is 
neither radically inaccessible nor hidden.31

--- [Page 6] ---
266 Andrea Acri
THE THREE MODELS APPLIED TO ANCIENT  
JA V ANESE ŚIV AISM AND BUDDHISM
The most popular hermeneutical paradigm applied to the study of Śivaism 
and Buddhism in ancient Java appears to be the “secular-historicist view”, 
which lays emphasis on political, social and historical realities. With respect 
to pre tenth-century Central Java, one theory has regarded Śivaism as 
standing in opposition to Buddhism and assumed that the former succeeded 
the latter. Advocates of this theory were Coedès,32 Krom33 and de Casparis,34 
who opposed the Bauddha dynasty of the (non-Javanese) Śailendras, which 
sponsored the building of Borobudur, to the Śaiva Sañjaya “dynasty” of 
Javanese pedigree. The latter line of kings would have erected the temple 
complex of Prambanan in order to celebrate the victory of Śivaism over 
Buddhism and the expulsion of the Śailendras from Java.
Following the criticism expressed earlier by Damais,35 Jordaan36 has 
challenged this view, arguing that Central Javanese rul ers freely patronized 
both religions, which peacefully co-existed on the island. Pointing at the 
fact that the Śivagṛha inscription of 856 CE describes several important 
parts of what seems to be the complex of Prambanan, which may have 
been built before the expulsion of the Śailendras in 855, and furthermore 
at the stylistic resemblance and physical proximity of Bauddha and Śaiva 
temples at the complex, he maintains that the two religions closely and 
harmoniously coexisted.37 Relying upon previous works by Bosch38 and 
Sarkar,39 Jordaan concluded that emphasis should be laid on the input 
by India, where “no sharp distinction existed between the followers of 
various Hindu and Buddhists creeds”, and “existing differences were 
[…] obliterated even more in the course of the ongoing development of 
Mahāyāna in a tantristic direction”.40 Jordaan and Wessing are further 
“inclined to question the validity of some current designations [such] as 
‘Hinduism’ and ‘Buddhism’ and to wonder whether these terms do full 
justice to the ideas of the Javanese of the times […] Both early Hinduism 
and Buddhism were lexible enough to accommodate and utilize each 
other’s icons”.41
This view closely accords with that elaborated by Nihom with respect 
to East Javanese Tantric Śivaism and Buddhism. Nihom, who relied upon 
the “substratum model” elaborated by Seyfort Ruegg, maintained that
the academic distinction of “Buddhist” and “Hindu” tex ts may obscure 
rather than reveal. Upon relection, this is not so strange, for the notion 
that esoteric Buddhism and Hinduism were separate in the sense of 
being incarnate as “churches” around the middle of the irst millennium 

--- [Page 7] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  267
in the Subcontinent may indeed prove to be a false superimposition 
of European religious history not only upon the history of the texts, 
but more generally in terms of social history.42
In criticizing the view, advanced by Teeuw and Robson,43 that the Kakawin 
Kuñjarakarṇa  was uniquely the product of the syncretistic Śiva-Buddha 
system of the Majapahit period, Nihom44 perceived that text and similar 
ones as thoroughly Tantric Buddhist products, which could be properly 
understood only in the light of a South Asian religious substratum mingling 
Hindu and Bauddha elements. Arguing against “the accepted notion that 
the admixture of Hindu and Buddhist tantric or tantristic elements is both a 
peculiar and pervasive characteristic of the religious culture of the islands 
and mainland of Southeast Asia”, Nihom remarked that
the “syncretism” of “Hindu” and “Buddhist” divinities in these 
maṇḍala s is ultimately of Indian origin. Hence, in future, a perception 
of the co-existence of “Hindu” and “Buddhist” elements in  the 
Archipelago may not be taken sui generis  as evidence for Indonesian 
syncretism.45
A position that seems to be middling between the “agonistic model” and 
the “substratum model” is that elaborated by Miksic.46 While emphasizing 
the existence of an actual divide and antagonism between Hinduism and 
Buddhism in ancient Java, as documented by the alleged existence of 
unambiguously divided architectural and iconographical motifs and the 
occurrence of a “healthy competition” in order to gain royal support, 
Miksic passingly conceded that “adherents of both religions used the same 
substratum of artistic vocabulary to convey their philosophies”.47
Hunter’s study on the Śiva-Buddha syncretism of Singhasari, while 
apparently conforming to the “agonistic model”, attempts at integrating 
socio-political aspects with theological ones. According to Hunter,
Krtanagara’s greatest achievement may be that in some sense he 
succeeded in making his own person the locus of unity between the two 
main streams of East Javanese religion, thereby affecting a religious 
union aimed at compelling the unseen forces of the cosmos to fall 
in behind his scheme of internal and external political uniication.48
Hence the fusion of Śaiva and Bauddha themes in Majapahit Java is to 
be attributed to the political and metaphysical agenda of Kṛtanagara, who 
pursued both goals of political hegemony and religious salvation.
A position that entirely conforms to the “borrowing model” is the one 
advanced by Soebadio49 when analysing the inter-textual and doctrinal 

--- [Page 8] ---
268 Andrea Acri
relationships between Śivaism and Buddhism in Sanskrit-Old Javanese 
religious scriptures of the Tutur class. Substitution of Bauddha deities with 
Śaiva ones and vice versa is especially common in Tuturs of both religious 
orientations. Passages of the Śaiva Jñānasiddhānta  run parallel with others 
found in the Bauddha Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan  and the Kalpabuddha , but 
the latter texts substitute relevant terms used in the Jñānasiddhānta  (e.g. 
the knowledge of non-duality personiied into Vāgīśvarī or Praṇava Tridevī, 
chapter 3, pp. 80–83) into their Bauddha counterparts (e.g. Prajñāpāramitā). 
An analogous instance of “translation” of Śaiva ideas into Bauddha terms 
occurs in the Sutasoma  Kakawin,50 whose canto 41 contains speculations 
on the Bauddha advayajñāna  or advayayoga  and the Śaiva “way of dying” 
(parātramārga ), both linked with the mantra aṃ-aḥ. The supreme goal, 
called paraṃbrahma  in the Jñānasiddhānta , is changed into advayajñāna  
in the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan  and the Sutasoma .
In his brief study on Javano-Balinese Śivaism, Sanderson51 has drawn 
the attention on the fact that in the Balinese ritual of Sūrya Sevana52 we 
ind Prajñādevī and Parimitādevī as the last two of the eight goddesses of 
the eight ingers that are counted in the preliminary ritual of the cleansing 
of the hands. According to Sanderson, these two goddesses were evidently 
created out of the Bauddha Prajñāpāramitā. Therefore, referring to the 
ritual “contaminations” which have occurred in Bali, Cambodia and 
Kashmir, Sanderson expressed the view that “the needs and expectations 
of the clients have lead to thoroughly syncretistic developments in three 
independent cultural contexts”.53 This attitude towards eclecticism is found 
in India as well, especially in the South Indian paddhati s, which were 
intended primarily as manuals whose aim is to guide the priest through 
the vast forest of Śaiva ritual.
REASSESSING THE SOURCES
On the basis of my reading of Old Javanese texts I have come to realize that 
any claim made in secondary literature that Śivaism and Buddhism were 
in Java and Bali syncretically united needs to be checked on the basis of 
a careful and impartial assessment of the extant textual evidence. Several 
important textual passages indeed appear to have been either incorrectly 
grasped or tendentiously (or perhaps subconsciously) misinterpreted, 
sometimes in order to attune them to modern political or religious agendas.54
As noted by Miksic55 and Santiko,56 even in the Singhasari-Majapahit 
period Śivaism and Buddhism did not constitute a merger or synthesis 
of religious doctrine or praxis but maintained their independence as two 

--- [Page 9] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  269
discrete systems, having separate types of religious structures for their 
respective priesthoods. My investigation into the corpus of premodern 
Old Javanese-cum-Sanskrit scriptures of Śaiva, and more rarely Bauddha, 
persuasion popularly known as Tuturs or Tattvas57 has conirmed this view. 
In what may be identiied as the earliest scriptures belonging to that corpus,58 
which stand closer, with respect to doctrine, to Sanskrit prototy pical sources 
from South Asia, I have found no claim of equality between Śaiva and 
Bauddha elements. In fact no trace whatsoever of Buddhism as a system 
or of elements directly traceable to Buddhism is found in those sources. 
It is only in later sources, in all likelihood compiled during the Singhasari 
and Majapahit period ( c.thirteenth–sixteenth century CE), or even later on 
Bali, that Tuturs invariably acknowledge the existence of three different 
“sects” called tripakṣa , namely Śaivas, Ṛṣis and Bauddhas or Saugatas, 
and to refer to the “Lord Śiva-Buddha”.
This state of affairs is mirrored in Kakawins written by Bauddha 
authors in East Java from the thirteenth to the ifteenth century, as well as 
in contemporary related pseudo-historical works, such as the Deśawarṇana , 
Raṅga Lawe , Pararaton  and Kiduṅ Sunda . These sources are also ready 
to acknowledge the equality of the Bauddha and Śaiva ultimate goals — 
yet not their soteric, yogic or ritual paths, which are clearly kept distinct. 
Correspondences between certain series of popular deities belonging to 
both traditions are also common. For instance, the Kakawin Arjunawijaya59 
of Mpu Tantular (stanzas 26.4–31.1), while maintaining that there is no 
distinction between Buddha and Śiva, states that they are distinct chosen 
objects of worship ( iṣṭidharma ) of the respective sects of the tripakṣa . 
It may thus be inferred that these religious streams maintained their 
integrity and peculiarity in the doctrinal, ritual and priestly domain, and 
therefore this uniication is to be taken only in the ultimate sense. Similarly, 
Sutasoma  42.2 describes the yoga path of the Bauddhas and Śaivas not 
only as distinct, being respectively advayajñāna  and ṣaḍaṅgayoga , but 
also leading to different goals; what it is claimed is that the followers of 
either path, in order to be successful, should know about the other as well. 
Mpu Tantular in stanzas 40.6 and 41.5 claims that the Bauddha path is 
more advanced and effective than the Śaiva one, which could become a 
pitfall to the true seeker of the ultimate Buddhist liberation insofar as it 
bestows supernatural powers that may lead the yogin astray.  Furthermore, 
as already noted by Aoyama,60 a marked critical attitude is evidently lying 
behind the whole Sutasoma , conceived as a Bauddha denunciation of the 
aberrant practices of certain Śaiva currents, embodied by the igure of the 
man-eater demon Poruṣāda. The paciication and “conversion” of protégées 

--- [Page 10] ---
270 Andrea Acri
of Śiva by prince Sutasoma thus reveals a Bauddha attempt to “convert” 
Śaiva followers to Buddhism.
With respect to the alleged syncretistic stance of the poem, we may 
here reiterate the point already made by Santoso, namely that
it is clear that the view that Śiva (or any other Hindu deity) may be 
regarded as Buddha is not held by the adherents of Hinduism. And 
in so far as Kern has claimed that Śiva is identiied with Buddha, it 
can only be said that at times Śiva, like Brahmā, has appeared as a 
Bodhisattva. It is self-evident then, that had there been any attempt to 
bring about a uniication of the two deities (which we do not concede) 
the initiative would come from the Buddhist and not from the Hindu.61
As is persuasively argued by Sanderson,62 the famous passage of the 
Sutasoma  equating the realities ( dhātu ) of the Buddha ( jinatva ) and Śiva 
(śivatattva ) (139.5) actually says that “the Lord Buddha is both the Buddha 
and Śiva” rather than espousing “a doctrine of absolute equality between the 
two religions within a reality beyond both”. Thus, to say that the two realities 
are but two manifestations of the ultimate reality of Buddha amounts to a 
thoroughly Bauddha perspective, similar to that exposed by Mpu Dusun 
in the Kuñjarakarṇa  when stating that “I, Vairocana, am embodied both 
as the Buddha and as Śiva” (23.4bcd).63 Several other passages of the 
Sutasoma  that have been seen as evidence of either syncretism or coalition, 
namely 40.1–42.5 and 138.1–7 — to which we may add verses 22.1–23.4 
of the Kuñjarakarṇa64 — rather represent attempts from the Bauddhas to 
appropriate elements of the Śaivas and accommodate them within their own 
system, perhaps in order to draw support from the followers of the latter 
tradition. Similar considerations may apply to the Bauddha appropriation 
of elements of Śaiva iconography.
Now, this kind of attitude conforms quite well to Paul Hacker’s famous 
deinition of “inclusivism” ( inklusivismus ):
Inclusivism is a concept I use to describe data from the area which 
we term Indian religion and, in particular, Indian religious philosophy. 
Inclusivism means declaring that a central conception of an alien 
religious or weltanschaulich group is identical with this or that central 
conception of the group to which one belongs oneself. To inclusivism 
there mostly belongs, explicitly or implicitly, the assertion that the alien 
declared to be identical with one’s own is in some way subordinate 
or inferior to the latter. In addition, no proof is generally furnished 
for the identity of the alien with one’s own.65

--- [Page 11] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  271
Thus, even though inclusivism admits that alien religious systems may 
contain some truth it also regards the home religion as superior in that it 
teaches (more effectively) a higher level, or greater number, of religious 
truths. This viewpoint may be compared to the hierarchical distinction 
between levels of truth that amounts to the emic distinction between 
lokottara  and laukika . However, from several statements of the Sutasoma , 
such as the famous statement bhinneka tuṅggal ika  (“they are different; 
they are one”) of canto 139.5d, it is actually possible to understand the 
author’s standpoint to stand closer to Grifiths’66 deinition of “pluralism”, 
according to which (coexisting) separate but equal systems are all effective 
in bringing salvation about. This is different from the inclusivist perspective, 
which tends to favour one primary system while absorbing into it certain 
elements belonging to an alien tradition. Be this as it may, all claims of 
equivalence of realities made by Old Javanese Bauddha sources must be 
reconsidered in the light of the fact that for both inclusivistic and pluralistic 
thought equality does not imply identity. The same holds true with respect 
to Hunter’s claim that
the shift in emphasis within kakawin towards a “principle of 
equivalence” among the “three major sects” […] must be linked to 
the career of Krtanagara, and his attempt to ensure political unity (and 
hegemony) through a symbolic amalgamation of the major religious 
currents of his time.67
On the basis of the available evidence, it is perhaps too early to claim that 
“amalgamation” (which reminds us of Kern’s vermenging ) is inherent to 
the “principle of equivalence”, which could otherwise be interpreted as a 
manifestation of the zealous activity of Bauddha authors and their courtly 
sponsors seeking to justify the appropriation of Śaiva elements into their 
pantheons. Even though we may concede that Kṛtanagara’s policy implied 
a genuine attempt on his side to syncretistically merge the two religions, 
we must remember that “there was never a igure prior to Kṛtanagara, nor 
one following him, who is described again and again in the inscriptional 
and literary records as Bhatara Siwa-Buddha ”.68 This fact suggests that 
his peculiar view was not endorsed by the majority of the contemporary 
religious clergies.69
It may also be pointed out, as noted by Sferra with respect to South 
Asian Sanskrit texts,70 that claims of equivalence between Śaiva and 
Bauddha supreme realities are a prominent feature of non-dualist Tantric 
literature. It may thus be argued that monism makes it easier to justify 
every aspect of existence as relative manifestations of one and the same 

--- [Page 12] ---
272 Andrea Acri
absolute. It is entirely plausible that Kṛtanagara’s milieu, as suggested by 
the textual references and iconographical elements that are traceable to 
it,71 partook of the non-dualist and antinomian currents centred on the cult 
of Kāla-Bhairava, a deity that in the Subcontinent is worshiped in both 
Śaiva and Bauddha circles.
Features that are comparable to those attested in non-dualist Tantric 
sources are also detectable in certain Old Javanese and Old Sundanese 
Tuturs which, judging from their colophons and palaeographic features, 
were in all probability composed in the late Majapahit period (sixteenth 
century) in circumscribed mountainous enclaves where Kabuyutans (i.e. 
“scriptoria”) were located.72 Showing a marked predilection for mystical, 
moralistic and didactic purposes, these texts73 are the expression of a kind 
of “popular” religiosity characterized by an embedded approach to religious 
experience, where Śaiva and Bauddha elements are reconigured along 
markedly “localized” lines, and where the divide between the two religious 
schools seems to have become less important and virtually imperceptible. 
Although the paucity of historical information on the social contexts in 
which these texts were composed and used does not allow us to draw any 
irm conclusion, it may be argued that this type of syncretistic approach to 
religious experience was conined to certain isolated milieus rather than 
constituting the mainstream.
Shifting our attention to Bali, it may be noted, if only leetingly, that 
several Tuturs among those composed in the period following the fall 
of Majapahit in the sixteenth century share similar characteristics with 
Tuturs stemming from the Sundanese enclaves described above. These 
texts, composed in Old Javanese but featuring many Balinisms, bear 
witness to a status quo where Śaiva and Bauddha elements lose their 
distinct character and coalesce into a mystical synthesis — witness the 
frequent references to Bhaṭāra Śiva-Buddha, and claims that the doctrines 
and yogic techniques they describe are the preserve of the Brahmans of 
the tripakṣa  indistinctively.74 It is to this unwieldy and virtually unstudied 
corpus of texts that modern Agama Hindu Bali owes, in many respects, 
its textual foundation.
Yet, in spite of the apparent lack of divide between Śaivas and 
Bauddhas propounded by these predominantly mystical Balinese sources, 
one hardly notes a syncretistic amalgamation between the two streams. 
Rather, the relationship between Buddhism and Śivaism on Bali since 
the Majapahit period seems to have assumed the contours of a symbiosis 
or Śaiva-Bauddha coalition — not so much in the domain of doctrine 
as in that of ritual. As the inferior status of the Pedanda Buddha and its 

--- [Page 13] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  273
subsidiary — albeit indispensable — role in ritual with respect to Pedanda 
Śiva suggests, Buddhism has traditionally been regarded by the Balinese 
as inferior to Śivaism. As testiied to by the illuminating remarks of such 
a reliable observer as Crawfurd, there is no doubt that on Bali, even as late 
as the early nineteenth century, Śivaism was predominant over Buddhism:
It is of the Hinduism of the sect of Śiva only, that I can furnish any 
detailed information. The Buddhists are few in number. […] The 
followers of Siva spoke of these of Buddha more with contempt 
than hatred or rancor — the last, indeed, are feelings not likely to be 
entertained by any people for a fallen sect; in which light the Buddhists 
were evidently looked upon. The Brahmans in their conversation often 
let fall expressions, which showed that they entertained no respect 
whatever for the followers of the opposite worship. The sect of Siva 
may indeed be denominated the national religion. It is the religion 
of nine-tenths of the people, of every sovereign on the island, and of 
every man in power.75
Crawfurd’s statement suggests that there existed a clear divide  between the 
two religions, and that the Balinese status quo may be comparable to the 
laukika /lokottara  contrastive distinction. The situation that developed on 
the island might be regarded as the result of a dialectic relationship thanks 
to which the two religions have inally come to terms — one (Śivaism) 
recognizing the (partial and relative) validity and inferior status of the other.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Having surveyed the previous literature touching upon the relationship 
of Śivaism and Buddhism in Java and Bali, as well as in the Indian 
Subcontinent, I have critically assessed the view that a syncretistic, and 
unitary, Śiva-Buddha religion characterized the mainstream religiosity 
of the Singhasari-Majapahit period. Having found the three main 
hermeneutical models employed by scholars of Śivaism and Buddhism 
in the Subcontinent to be applicable also to the analysis of the dialectic 
between the two religions in the Archipelago, I have argued that the 
equivalence of Śaiva and Bauddha supreme goals and/or deities claimed 
by certain Old Javanese sources may be regarded as attempts by one 
system (mostly Buddhism) to appropriate familiar elements of the other. 
This phenomenon of appropriation would appear to have been driven by 
an “inclusivist” or, at times, “pluralist” attitude. Going against past claims 
regarding such a phenomenon as a typically or uniquely local feature that 

--- [Page 14] ---
274 Andrea Acri
would relect a supposed “openness” and eclecticism of the people of the 
Indonesian Archipelago with regard to religious matters, I stressed the 
need to analyse it against a local, context-speciic background on the one 
hand, and a larger, pan-Asian context of exchange and dialectic between 
the two religions on the other.
My argument is that in investigating such complex and multifarious 
phenomenon as the relationship between Śivaism and Buddhism in 
premodern Indonesia, one cannot follow an approach that is narrowly 
theoretical (e.g. “structuralist”, like Rassers’) without running the risk of 
producing an ahistorical picture. Since this relationship entailed variation 
according to genres and media of expression, milieu of production and 
geographical location; underwent considerable development over time; 
and was context-speciic, it follows that a historicist and multidisciplinary 
approach must be adopted — accompanied by a more careful and 
philologically sound assessment of original textual sources.
Let me conclude by trying to answer, if only in a very preliminary 
manner, the question as to what would have triggered Bauddha appropriations 
of Śaiva elements. Being persuaded by the arguments elaborated by 
Hunter, which conform to a “secular and historicist interpretation”,  
I am of the opinion that Kṛtanagara’s religio-ritual agenda, dominated by 
antinomian practices associated with Kāla-Bhairava, exerted a signiicant 
impact on the formation of a coalition between Śivaism and Buddhism, and 
between the respective religious clergies — their unease notwithstanding. 
Kṛtanagara’s endeavour would have served the purpose of forming an 
analogous, and all-powerful, coalition against his external (as well as 
internal) political enemies in the real world.
Yet, this historical fact alone is not suficient to fully explain the status 
quo depicted by the (Old Javanese, Middle Javanese and Old Sundanese) 
written sources. Phenomena of appropriation that relect what I have deemed 
to be an “inclusivist” or “pluralist” attitude cannot be uniquely the result 
of historical-political circumstances but are likely to have been shaped by 
different cultural dynamics. For example, we may locate these in a Javanese 
(as well as Balinese) context where Śivaism has been for several centuries 
the dominant religion and Buddhism, albeit widespread on the territory, 
represented a minority. In such milieus, where Old Javanese belles-lettres 
had traditionally been the prerogative of Śaiva poets sponsored by Śaiva 
Kings, the eflorescence of literary specimens of Bauddha inspiration 
claiming the identity of Bauddha and Śaiva elements would constitute 
attempts by pious authors at proselytizing among their readership and, 
at the same time, gain royal support. The inclusion and appropriation of 

--- [Page 15] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  275
Śaiva elements by the Bauddhas through operations of textual bricolage 
so paradigmatically exempliied by the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, one 
recension of which embeds an originally Śaiva treatise on yoga,76 would 
constitute attempts at marketing the former system’s religious truths in 
a more effective way, following an approach that is in every respect 
analogous to the one documented by Sanderson with respect to South 
Asian Sanskrit sources.
On the other hand, the pronounced Śaiva and Bauddha coalitions 
— if not actual “syncretisms” — of soteric means and doctrinal items 
documented in Tuturs stemming from late-Majapahit popular milieus may 
be regarded as hybrid cultural expressions of peripheral cosmopolitan 
areas, where original sectarian boundaries ceased to play a relevant role 
in framing the everyday religious experience. What caused a progressive 
hybridization of Śivaism and Buddhism, as well as their convergence 
towards a higher “mystic synthesis” — much like the one that eventually 
developed in Javanese milieus after the contact with Islam since the ifteenth 
century — might have been the progressive departure from the point of 
origin, and zenith, of the Indic religious and cultural values carried by the 
Sanskrit Cosmopolis; their ensuing transformation and “localization”; and 
the decadence of traditional forms of clergy, along with the development 
of new cultic embedded orthopraxies.
Notes
 1. According to the Chinese pilgrim Fa-Hsien, on Java (Ye-Po-Ti) around 414 
CE the followers of Buddhism were much fewer than the “Brahmans and 
inidels”. A few years later, other Chinese sources speak of a widespread 
diffusion of Buddhism over the island (cf. Ensink, “Śiva-Buddhism in Java 
and Bali”, pp. 178–79). Yi-Jing visited Sumatra in 689–692 CE, noting a 
signiicant Buddhist presence. Although many contemporary expressions of 
“Balinese Buddhism” may be the result of modern revivalism, it should be 
noted that enclaves of “Bauddha Brahmans” are extant on Bali, especially in 
the eastern region of Karangasem; it is these communities that have pre served 
the rare Old Javanese texts of Bauddha persuasion (cf. Hooykaas, Balinese 
Bauddha Brahmans ).
 2. See, for instance, Snellgrove’s article eloquently titled “Syncretism as a main 
feature of Indonesian culture”.
 3. Kern, “Over de vermenging van Çiwaisme en Buddhisme op Java”.
 4. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst.
 5. Rassers, Pañji, the culture hero ; “Śiva en Boeddha in den Indischen Archipel”.
 6. The two brothers Bubhukṣa and Gagaṅ Akiṅ have been regarded to represent, 
respectively, the Śaiva and Bauddha ascetic way (cf. Ensink, “Sutasoma’s 

--- [Page 16] ---
276 Andrea Acri
Teaching to Gajavaktra,” pp. 201–201; “Śiva-Buddhism in Java and Bali”, 
pp. 186–87). Gagaṅ Akiṅ is the quintessentially Śaiva ascetic, practising 
severe austerities and dietary restrictions, while his brother enjoys eating all 
sorts of food including meat and indulges in drinking alcohol. After having 
been put to trial by God who had descended on earth in the form of a tigress, 
both obtain liberation and ascend to heaven, although Bubhukṣa’s method is 
perceived as superior to the one of his older brother.
 7. Krom, Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst, pp. 118–19.
 8. Rassers, Pañji, the culture hero, pp. 65–66.
 9. Zoetmuder, “Die Hochreligionen Indonesiens”, pp. 301–304.
10. Pigeaud, Java in the Fourteenth Century, pp. 3–4.
11. Gonda, “Śiva in Indonesien”, p. 28.
12. Ibid., pp. 27–30.
13. Soebadio, Jñānasiddhānta, pp. 55ff.
14. Supomo, ‘‘‘Lord of the Mountains’ in the Fourteenth Century kakawin ”.
15. de Casparis and I.W. Mabbett, “Religion and Popular Beliefs of Southeast 
Asia before c. 1500”, pp. 328–29.
16. Santoso, Sutasoma.
17. Ensink, “Śiva-Buddhism in Java and Bali”, pp. 192–93.
18. Nihom, Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism.
19. Hunter, “The Body of the King”.
20. Ibid., p. 52.
21. The earliest scriptures belonging to this corpus might have already been in 
existence by the ifth century CE, however it is only from the seventh century 
that evidence for the circulation of fully-ledged Tantric texts begins to appear 
in South Asia. The upper limit for most of the revealed scriptures (Tantras, 
Āgamas, Sūtras) of both Śaiva and Bauddha persuasion may be drawn to the 
c.tenth–eleventh century CE.
22. Seyfort Ruegg, “Sur les rapports entre le bouddhisme et le ‘substrat religieux’ 
indien et tibétain”; “A note on the Relationship between Buddhist and ‘Hindu’ 
Divinities in Buddhist Literature and Iconology”; The symbiosis of Buddhism 
with Brahmanism/Hinduism in South Asia and of Buddhism with ‘local cults’ 
in Tibet and the Himalayan region.
23. Seyfort Ruegg, The symbiosis of Buddhism  …, p. vi.
24. Ibid., pp. 11 and 134, notes that the opposition between laukika  and lokottara  
recalls the distinction between the etic categories of “Little Tradition” and 
“Great Tradition”.
25. Sanderson, “Vajrayāna: Origin and Function”.
26. See Sanderson, “Vajrayāna: Origin and Function”; “History thr ough 
Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the Pañcarātra and the Buddhist 
Yoginītantras”, “Śaivism among the Khmers”, “The Śaiva Age”; Bühnemann, 
“Buddhist Deities and Mantras in the Hindu Tantras I”, p. 303; and Seyfort 
Ruegg, “A note on the Relationship between Buddhist and ‘Hindu’ Divinities 
in Buddhist Literature and Iconology”, p. 737.

--- [Page 17] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  277
27. Sanderson, “Śaivism among the Khmers”, pp. 436, 440.
28. Seyfort Ruegg, The symbiosis of Buddhism …, p.  viii.
29. Ibid., p. 109.
30. Sferra, “Some Considerations on the Relationship Between Hindu and Buddhist 
Tantras”.
31. Ibid., p. 61.
32. Coedès, Les états hindouisés d’Indochine et d’Indonésie , pp. 90, 107.
33. Krom,  Hindoe-Javaansche geschiedenis , pp. 172 –73.
34. de Casparis, Prasasti Indonesia II , p. 300.
35. Damais, “Bibliographie Indonesienne”.
36. Jordaan, In praise of Prambanan ; “Co-existence of religions in ancient Central 
Java”.
37. Ibid., pp. 122–23.
38. Bosch, Het vraagstuk van de Hindoe-kolonisatie van den archipel.
39. Sarkar, “The evolution of the Siva-Buddha cult in Java”.
40. Bosch, Het vraagstuk van de Hindoe-kolonisatie van den archipel, quoted in 
Jordaan, “Co-existence of religions in ancient Central Java”, pp. 124–25.
41. Jordaan and Wessing, “Human sacriice of Prambanan”, p. 65.
42. Nihom, Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism , p. 15.
43. Teeuw and Robson, Kuñjarakarṇa Dharmakathana , p. 9.
44. Nihom, Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism , pp. 20–21.
45. Ibid., p. 114.
46. Miksic, “The Buddhist-Hindu Divide in Premodern Southeast Asia”.
47. Ibid., p. 5.
48. Hunter, “The Body of the King”, p. 41.
49. Soebadio, Jñānasiddhānta , pp. 12–15.
50. Santoso, Sutasoma.
51. Sanderson, “Śaivism among the Khmers”, p. 377.
52. See Hooykaas, Sūryasevana , p. 50.
53. Sanderson, “Śaivism among the Khmers”, p. 377.
54. This holds especially true in the case of certain secondary literature in 
Indonesian, either of scholarly or popular nature that, in the light of the dictum 
bhinneka tunggal ika (“unity in diversity”) of the Sutasoma  that has become 
the oficial motto of the Indonesian Republic, likes to see in the religious 
eclecticism of the Majapahit period the origin of the principle of religious 
pluralism laying at the basis of the modern Indonesian state, or a manifestation 
of the “openness” and accommodating attitude of many Indonesians with 
respect to religious matters.
55. Miksic, “The Buddhist-Hindu Divide in Premodern Southeast Asia”, pp. 5–6.
56. Santiko, “Early Research on Sivaitic Hinduism during the Majapahit Era”, 
p. 62.
57. These texts, preserved by the hundreds on Balinese palm-leaf manuscripts, 
and on just a handful of rare palm-leaf manuscripts from Java, form the 
textual basis of Śaivism in the Indonesian Archipelago. A salient feature 

--- [Page 18] ---
278 Andrea Acri
of the Tutur/Tattva literature is the translation and reconiguration of Indic 
elements pertaining to linguistic, soteriological and theological domains into 
a local context of doctrine and practice. A survey of this corpus of texts may 
be found in Acri, “The Sanskrit-Old Javanese Tutur Literature from Bali”.
58. Namely the Vṛhaspatitattva , Tattvajñāna , Mahājñāna , Tutur Kamokṣan , 
Bhuvanakośa , Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa  and Dharma Pātañjala . Although some of 
these scriptures are compilations of materials of different provenance, they are 
likely to have reached their deinitive forms already by the tenth or eleventh 
century CE.
59. Supomo, Arjunawijaya.
60. Aoyama, “Prince and Priest”, pp. 10ff.
61. Santoso, Sutasoma,  p. 42.
62. Sanderson, “The Śaiva Age”, fn. 287, pp. 124–25.
63. Ibid., p. 124.
64. See Teeuw and Robson, Kuñjarakarṇa Dharmakathana , pp. 122–25.
65. Quoted and translated from the German by Seyfort Ruegg, The symbiosis of 
Buddhism …, p. 97.
66. Grifiths, Problems of Religious Diversity , p. 15.
67. Hunter, “The Body of the King”, p. 38.
68. Ibid., p. 34.
69. Ibid., p. 41, refers to a passage of the Deśawarṇana  (56.2–57.4) mentioning the 
disappearance of the image of Akṣobhya from Caṇḍi Jawi, which might have 
been due to the intervention of the Śaiva abbot out of his negative judgment 
of Kṛtanagara’s syncretistic attitude, and which was taken by Prapañca as 
the cause of the sanctuary being struck by lightning in 1331 CE.
70. Sferra, “Some Considerations on the Relationship Between Hindu and Buddhist 
Tantras”, pp. 68–69, has noted that texts belonging to Bauddha and Śaiva 
non-dualist traditions tend to show no fundamental difference between the 
descriptions of the paramount goals of their respective soteriological paths, 
for instance emptiness ( śūnyatā ) or oneness with Śiva ( śivātmaka ).
71. Witness, for instance, the Sukāmṛta inscription of 1259 CE, which suggests 
the existence of a link between Kṛtanagara’s East Javanese milieu and 
Bhairavika Śivaism (cf. Santiko, “Early Research on Sivaitic Hinduism during 
the Majapahit Era”, p. 58; Hunter, “The Body of the King”, pp. 35–36); 
and the King’s allegiance, as suggested by canto 43 of the Deśavarṇana , 
to Tantric Bauddha rituals connected with the Kālacakra system and such 
texts as the Guhyasamājatantra and Hevajratantra — seemingly in response  
to the consecration of his rival, the Mongol emperor Kublai Khan, into an 
analogous ritual path (cf. Hunter, “The Body of the King”, pp. 35–36; Moens, 
“Het Boeddhisme op Java en Sumatra in zijn laatste bloeiperiode”, especially 
pp. 527–30).
72. That such Kabuyutans represented what had survived of the hermitages 
(patapan ) of the Śaiva ascetics of the Ṛṣi group is suggested by Old Sundanese 

--- [Page 19] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  279
accounts such as the Bhujanga Manik (cf. Noorduyn, “Bujangga Manik’s 
journeys through Java”, pp. 416–18; Acri, Dharma Pātañjala , pp. 44–48; 
Noorduyn and Teeuw, Three Old Sundanese Poems , p. 281). Note further that 
in the Ciburuy scriptorium, along with a collection of palm-leaf manuscripts, 
may be found a few Śaiva and Bauddha implements, namely a trident and a 
vajra -bell (I have witnessed this myself on occasion of my visits there).
73. Including the Saṅ Hyaṅ Siksa Kandaṅ Karĕsian  (Old Sundanese), Saṅ 
Hyaṅ Hayu  (Old Javanese) and the many versions thereof, Siksa Guru  (Old 
Javanese), Bhimasorga  (Old Javanese-cum-Old Sundanese), etc. A survey 
of these texts, a handful of which have been translated into Indonesian, may 
be found in Noorduyn and Teeuw, Three Old Sundanese Poems, pp. 2–6;  
cf. also Dharma Pātañjala , pp. 3–8.
74. See Gaṇapatitattva (ed. Sudarshana Devi), Old Javanese prose appendix to 
śloka s 51–53 paragraph 13, referring to the saṅ brāhmana bhujaṅga  (i.e. 
Rṣis) śaiva sogata  (i.e. Bauddhas); Jñānasiddhānta  chapter 5 (pp. 86–87, 
106–107), mentioning śaiva  and bauddha , both qualiied by the expression 
saṅ bhujaṅga  — which would thus appear to have lost its usual connotation 
of “member of the Ṛṣi group” to indicate a Brahman or person of religious 
rank.
75. Crawfurd, “On the Existence of the Hindu Religion in the Island of Bali”, 
pp. 129–30.
76. See Lokesh Chandra, “Śaiva Version of Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan”, p. 7.
Bibliography
Acri, Andrea. “The Sanskrit-Old Javanese Tutur Literature from Bali. The Textual 
Basis of Śaivism in Ancient Indonesia”. Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici , no. 1 
(2006): 107–37.
— — —. Dharma Pātañjala; A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java Studied in the 
Light of Related Old Javanese and Sanskrit Texts. Groningen: Egbert Forsten,  
2011.
Aoyama, Toru. “Prince and Priest: Mpu Tantular’s Two Works in the Fourteenth 
Century Majapahit”. Seminar Paper for the International Workshop on 
Southeast Asian Studies, no. 13. Leiden: KITLV , 1998.
Bosch, Frederik D.K. Het vraagstuk van de Hindoe-kolonisatie van den archipel. 
Leiden: Stenfert Kroese, 1946 (Inaugural address).
Bühnemann, Gudrun. “Buddhist Deities and Mantras in the Hindu Tantras I: The 
Tantrasārasaṃgraha  and the Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati” . Indo-Iranian 
Journal, no. 42 (1999): 303–34.
Casparis, Johannes G. de. Prasasti Indonesia II; Selected inscriptions from the 
7th to the 9th century AD . Bandung: Masa Baru, 1956.
Casparis, J.G. de and I.W. Mabbett. “Religion and Popular Beliefs of Southeast Asia 
before c. 1500”. In The Cambridge History of Southeast Asia, Vol. I: From 

--- [Page 20] ---
280 Andrea Acri
early times to c. 1500 , edited by Nicholas Tarling, pp. 276–339. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Coedès, George. Les états hindouisés d’Indochine et d’Indonésie . Paris: E. De 
Boccard, 1964.
Crawfurd, John. “On the Existence of the Hindu Religion in the Island of Bali”. 
Asiatick Researches, no. 13 (1820): 128–70.
Damais, Louis-Charles “Bibliographie Indonesienne”. Bulletin de l’École Française 
d’Extrême-Orient , no. 54 (1968): 295–522.
Ensink, Jacob. “Sutasoma’s Teaching to Gajavaktra, the Snake and the Tigress 
(Tantular, Sutasoma Kakavin 38.1-42.4)”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde , no. 130 (1974): 195–226.
— — —. “Śiva-Buddhism in Java and Bali”. In Buddhism in Ceylon and Studies 
on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries. Report on a Symposium in 
Göttingen , edited by Heinz Bechert, pp. 178–98. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck 
& Ruprecht, 1978.
Gonda, Jan. “Śiva in Indonesien”. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens , 
no. 14 (1970): 1–31.
Grifiths, Paul J. Problems of Religious Diversity . Malden: Blackwell Publishers, 
2001.
Hooykaas, Christiaan. Sūryasevana; The way to God of a Balinese Śiva Priest . 
Amsterdam-London: North Holland Publishing Company, 1966.
——— .  Balinese Bauddha Brahmans . Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing 
Company, 1973.
Hunter, Thomas M. “The Aridharma Reliefs of Caṇḍi Jago”. In Society and Culture 
of Southeast Asia: Continuities and Changes , edited by Lokesh Chandra, 
pp. 69–100. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 2000.
— — —. “The Body of the King: Reappraising Singhasari Period Syncretism”. 
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, no. 38/1 (2007): 27–53.
Jordaan, Roy E. In praise of Prambanan: Dutch essays on the Loro Jonggrang 
temple complex . Leiden: KITLV Press, 1996.
— — —. “Co-existence of religions in ancient Central Java”. In Society and Culture 
of Southeast Asia: Continuities and Changes , edited by Lokesh Chandra, 
pp. 121–26. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 2000.
Jordaan, Roy E. and R. Wessing. “Human sacriice of Prambanan”. Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, no. 152 (1996): 45–73.
Kern, Henrik. “Over de vermenging van Çiwaisme en Buddhisme op Java, naar 
aanleiding van het Oud-Javaansch gedicht Sutasoma”.  Verspreide geschriften  
4 (1916): 149–77.
Krom, Nicolaas J. Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaansche Kunst. Tweede herzene 
druk. Deel I.  s’Gravenhage: Nijhoff, 1923.
——— .  Hindoe-Javaansche geschiedenis . s’Gravenhage: Nijhoff, 1931.
Lokesh Chandra. “Śaiva Version of Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan”. In Cultural 
Horizons of India  V, edited by Lokesh Chandra, pp. 7–101. New Delhi: 
International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan, 1997.

--- [Page 21] ---
Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva-Buddha” in Java and Bali  281
Miksic, John. “The Buddhist-Hindu Divide in Premodern Southeast Asia”. Working 
paper no. 1, Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre 2010. <http://www.iseas.edu.sg/nsc/
publications_working_paper_series.htm>. 1 February 2011.
Moens, J.L. “Het Boeddhisme op Java en Sumatra in zijn laatste bloeiperiode”. 
Tijdschrift van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen , 
no. 64 (1924): 521–79.
Nihom, Max. Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism. The 
Kuñjarakarṇadharma-kathana and the Yogatantra . Wien: Sammlung de 
Nobili, Institut für Südasien-, Tibet- und Buddhismuskunde der Universität 
Wien, 1994.
Noorduyn, Jacobus. “Bujangga Manik’s journeys through Java: Topographical 
data from an Old Sundanese source”. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde , no. 138 (1982): 413–42.
Noorduyn, Jacobus and Andries Teeuw. Three Old Sundanese poems . Leiden: 
KITLV Press, 2006.
Pigeaud, Theodor G. Java in the Fourteenth Century. A Study in Cultural History, 
Vol. IV . s’Gravenhage: Nijhoff, 1962.
Rassers, Willem H. “Śiva en Boeddha in den Indischen Archipel”. In Gedenkschrift 
75-jarig bestaan van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde , 
pp. 222–53. s’Gravenhage: Nijhoff, 1926.
——— .  Pañji, the culture hero: A structural study of religion in Java . The Hague: 
Nijhoff, 1959.
Robson, Stuart O. Deśawarṇana (Nāgarakṛtāgama) by Mpu Prapañca . Leiden: 
KITLV Press, 1995.
Sanderson, Alexis G.J.S. “Vajrayāna: Origin and Function”. In Buddhism into 
the Year 2000. International conference proceedings , pp. 87–102. Bangkok/
Los-Angeles: Dhammakaya Foundation, 1994.
— — —. “History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the Pañcarātra 
and the Buddhist Yoginītantras”. In Les sources et le temps. A colloquium. 
Pondicherry, 11–13 January 1997 , edited by F. Grimal, pp. 1–47. Pondicherry: 
IFP/EFEO, 2001.
— — —. “Śaivism among the Khmers. Part I”. Bulletin de l’École Française 
d’Extrême-Orient , no. 90/91 (2003–04): 349–462.
— — —. “The Śaiva Age — The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the 
Early Medieval Period”. In Genesis and Development of Tantrism , edited by 
Shingo Einoo, pp. 41–350. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University 
of Tokyo, 2009.
Santiko, Hariani. “Early Research on Sivaitic Hinduism during the Majapahit Era”. 
In The Legacy of Majapahit , edited by J. Miksic and E. Soekatno, pp. 55–69. 
Singapore: National Heritage Board, 1995.
Santoso, Soewito. Sutasoma: A Study in Javanese Wajrayana . New Delhi: 
International Academy of Indian Culture, 1975.
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan. “The evolution of the Siva-Buddha cult in Java”. Journal 
of Indian History , no. 45/3 (1969): 637–46.

--- [Page 22] ---
282 Andrea Acri
Seyfort Ruegg, David “Sur les rapports entre le bouddhisme et le ‘substrat religieux’ 
indien et tibétain”. Journal Asiatique , no. 252 (1964): 77–95.
— — —. “A note on the Relationship between Buddhist and ‘Hindu’ Divinities in 
Buddhist Literature and Iconology: The laukika /lokottara  Contrast and the 
Notion of an Indian ‘Religious Substratum’ ”. In Le parole e i marmi. Studi 
in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70° compleanno , edited by R. Torella,  
pp. 735–41. Roma: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente, 2001.
——— .  The symbiosis of Buddhism with Brahmanism/Hinduism in South Asia 
and of Buddhism with ‘local cults’ in Tibet and the Himalayan region . Wien: 
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2008.
Sferra, Francesco. “Some Considerations on the Relationship Between Hindu and 
Buddhist Tantras”. In Buddhist Asia 1: Papers from the First Conference 
of Buddhist Studies Held in Naples in May 2001, edited by  G. Verardi and  
S. Vita, pp. 57–84. Kyoto: Italian School of East Asian Studies, 2003.
Snellgrove, David. “Syncretism as a main feature of Indonesian culture, as seen 
by one more used to another kind of civilization”. Indonesia Circle , no. 56 
(November 1991): 25–48.
Soebadio, Haryati. Jñānasiddhānta. Secret Lore of the Balinese Śaiva Priest . The 
Hague: Nijhoff, 1971.
Sudarshana Devi. Gaṇapati-tattwa . New Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture, 1958.
Supomo, Suryo. ‘‘ ‘Lord of the Mountains’ in the Fourteenth Century kakawin ”. 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde , no. 128 (1972): 281–97.
——— .  Arjunawijaya: A kakawin of Mpu Tantular (2 vols.). The Hague: Nijhoff, 
1977.
Teeuw, Andries and Stuart O. Robson. Kuñjarakarṇa Dharmakathana . The Hague: 
Nijhoff, 1981.
Zoetmuder, Josephus P. “Die Hochreligionen Indonesiens”. In Die Religionen 
Indonesiens , edited by W. Stöhr and P.J. Zoetmulder, pp. 262–314. Stuttgart: 
Kohlhammer, 1965.