--- [Page 1] ---
HAL Id: halshs-01910105
https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01910105
Submitted on 1 Nov 2018
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Written traces of the Buddhist past
Arlo Griffiths
To cite this version:
Arlo Griffiths. Written traces of the Buddhist past: mantras and dhāraṇīs in Indonesian inscriptions.
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, Cambridge University Press (CUP), 2014, 77
(01), pp.137-194. ฀10.1017/S0041977X14000056฀. ฀halshs-01910105฀

--- [Page 2] ---
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and
African Studies
http://journals.cambridge.org/BSO
Additional services for Bulletin of the School of
Oriental and African Studies:
Email alerts: Click here
Subscriptions: Click here
Commercial reprints: Click here
Terms of use : Click here
Written traces of the Buddhist past: Mantras  and
Dhāraī s in Indonesian inscriptions
Arlo Grifths
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies / Volume 77 / Issue 01 / February 2014, pp
137 - 194
DOI: 10.1017/S0041977X14000056, Published online: 15 May 2014
Link to this article: http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0041977X14000056
How to cite this article:
Arlo Grifths (2014). Written traces of the Buddhist past: Mantras  and Dhāraī s in
Indonesian inscriptions . Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 77, pp
137-194 doi:10.1017/S0041977X14000056
Request Permissions : Click here
Downloaded from http://journals.cambridge.org/BSO, IP address: 139.228.61.250 on 28 May 2014


--- [Page 3] ---
Written traces of the Buddhist past: Mantras
and Dhāran ̣īs in Indonesian inscriptions
Arlo Griffiths *
École française d ’Extrême-Orient, Jakarta Centre
arlo.griffiths@efeo.net
Abstract
This article examines a group of ten Indonesian inscriptions citing a range
ofgāthās,mantra s and dhāran ̣īs. The texts, contextualized and in some
cases read and identified for the first time, underline the pan-Asian char-
acter of Buddhism and the integral place the Indonesian archipelago
once held in the ancient Buddhist world. The identification of the sources
of several of these texts in known Sanskrit scriptures raises the question
whether some of these texts, none of which survives as such in the archi-
pelago, were once transmitted there in manuscript form.
Keywords: Mantra ,Dhāran ̣ī, Indonesia, Sanskrit, Inscription, Ritual
deposit, Dharma relic
That Indonesia was a vibrant part of the ancient Buddhist world is well known
from foreign (mainly Chinese) written sources, and from the almost unani-
mously wordless testimony of Buddhist monuments and sculptures, found at
many sites in Sumatra, Kalimantan (Borneo), Java and Bali. Of the written
(Sanskrit) vectors of Buddhism –revealed texts, doctrinal works, commentaries,
ritual manuals –that must once have existed, only an infinitesimally small frac-
tion have been transmitted into the present in the form of very scarce texts,
mainly in Old Javanese language, preserved on Bali.1
Written sources that have hardly been exploited thus far to gain a greater
understanding of some aspects of the history of Buddhism in Indonesia exist
in the form of Buddhist texts inscribed on stone and metal surfaces, which
were better able to withstand the ravages of time than the palm-leaf manuscripts
* Being based in Indonesia, without access to a good library, let alone a library for
Buddhist Studies, I have perforce depended heavily for this paper on the help of many
kind colleagues. It is a pleasure to express my gratitude, for support by no means limited
to bibliographical information, to Véronique Degroot, Rolf Giebel, Don Longuevan,
Horst Liebner, Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pierre-Yves Manguin, Cristina Scherrer-
Schaub, Jonathan Silk, Iain Sinclair, Ryugen Tanemura, Vincent Tournier, Geoff
Wade and Michael Willis.
1 For an excellent concise overview of the textual and archaeological sources for the his-
tory of Buddhism in Indonesia, and a detailed listing of the relevant secondary literature,
see Hooykaas 1973 :8–14. Nihom ( 1994 ) is a fine study concerned only with
non-epigraphical textual materials. One relevant paper, dealing with one of the two
most important doctrinal texts preserved from ancient Java, the San ̇Hyan ̇
Kamah āyānan Mantranaya , appeared too late for Nihom to be able to take it into
account. See Ishii 1992 , whose results were partly taken over in Lokesh Chandra 1995 .Bulletin of SOAS ,77, 1 (2014), 137 –194. © SOAS, University of London, 2014.
doi:10.1017/S0041977X14000056

--- [Page 4] ---
used by learned Buddhists in ancient times. The contents of these inscriptions
are almost invariably taken from scriptural sources, that is, they are (citations
from) texts that were considered to have been uttered by the historical Buddha
Śākyamuni or other beings holding equal or almost equal authority, such as
direct disciples of Śākyamuni, or other Buddhas and even Bodhisattvas. The
majority of such inscriptions are constituted, as elsewhere in the Buddhist
world, by specimens of the Prat ītyasamutp ādagāthā(i.e. the ye dharm āh ̣for-
mula).2Other examples of such pithy verses ( gāthās) are, however, also attested,
and some of them are of interest for the history of Buddhist literature.3There are
also, besides these very common and less common gāthās, a substantial number
of inscriptions belonging to the class of texts to which the names mantra and
dhāran ̣īapply.
The existence of these mantra anddhāran ̣īinscriptions in Indonesia has not
as yet played any role whatsoever in the study of Indian and pan-Asian
Buddhism. One may consult any of the seminal studies on Indian dhāran ̣īs
that appeared in the 1980s and 1990s,4and find plentiful references to
dhāran ̣īs transmitted in various parts of the Buddhist world at greater or smaller
remove from the historical heartland of Buddhism in India –Sri Lanka, China,
Korea, Japan, Afghanistan, and especially Tibet;5but Indonesia is never men-
tioned. This seems to be a loss as much for the study of the history of
pan-Asian Buddhism, as it is for the study of Indonesian cultural history.
I hope to show in this contribution that the Indonesian dhāran ̣īinscriptions
have much to offer as comparative material for the historian of Indian and
pan-Asian Buddhism because the diversity of dhāran ̣ītexts attested in
Indonesian inscriptions seems substantial,6because the types of objects bearing
these inscriptions often help our understanding of the contexts in which these
texts were used, and because the information about archaeological context is
in several cases sufficient to shed extra light on the texts and the artefacts on
which they are inscribed. Simultaneously I hope to show that engagement
2 See Griffiths ( 2011 , items 1, 9 and 12), for specimens from Sumatra. I take this oppor-
tunity to correct a few errors in that publication. With regard to item 1, the gold foil
engraved with the ye dharm āh ̣stanza that was excavated in 1928 on the Bukit
Seguntang in Palembang has not, as I affirmed in 2011, “fallen through the nest of colo-
nial period Dutch archaeologists ”, but has been repeatedly referred to in Krom ’s1938
study that was unknown to me when I published this gold foil inscription. See Krom
(1938 : 399 –400, 411 –12, 416). With regard to item 12, I carelessly misidentified the
metre of the verse cited in the Pulau Sawah inscription: it is not in anus ̣t ̣ubh, but in
jagat īmeter. I also failed to note another possible source for this verse, namely the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra (ed. Skorupski, 146: 4 –6, several emendations of the
published edition are required). This last omission is particularly poignant in the light
of some of the material to be discussed in the present study.
3 See Skilling (forthcoming) for a study of a Sanskrit gāthāattested in multiple specimens
from a wide range of sites in maritime South-East Asia, but not traceable in any known
canonical text.
4 Especially Schopen 1982 ,1985 ,1989a and b; and Bentor 1995 .
5 See Gippert ( 2004 and forthcoming) for fascinating dhāran ̣īmaterial from the Maldives.
6 Based on the studies of Schopen and those who followed in his footsteps, I am tempted
to say that the diversity is greater than it is in India, but since I have not undertaken a
systematic search for such inscriptions in India, and the authors mentioned do not
claim to have been exhaustive either, this impression may be misleading.138 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 5] ---
with Buddhist literature which has not been preserved in Indonesia, as well as
with the scholarly study of Buddhist texts and artefacts found elsewhere in
Asia, cannot be ignored if our aim is to understand the function and meaning
of Buddhist artefacts found in Indonesia. This might seem to be a self-evident
point, but in Indonesia epigraphy is the preserve of archaeologists, who tend
to be sent into the field without serious training in Sanskrit, let alone
Buddhist studies. The result is that none of the interesting dhāran ̣īinscriptions
unearthed in recent decades have been properly published,7and that the signifi-
cance of these artefacts has had very little impact on archaeological and histor-
ical research.
There are exceptions, which can usefully be mentioned here by way of intro-
duction to the main study. The late Indonesian scholar Boechari has published
transliterations of Buddhist mantra anddhāran ̣īmaterial, frequently with the
modest admission that he did not feel competent to interpret the data, and had
to defer to specialists in Buddhist studies for that task. The challenge posed
by his 1982 publication (reprinted in Boechari 2012 : 575 –86) of a lengthy
dhāran ̣īinscription engraved on a lead-bronze strip excavated near Borobudur
was more recently taken up by Hudaya Kandahjaya, who drew the following
conclusions ( 2009 : 2, with table 1 on p. 4):
Given Boechari ’s readings, it appears that some of the lines in this
inscription correspond with verses preserved in a Balinese stuti
called the Nava-Kampa ,o r “The Nine-Fold Tremble ”. So far, the origin
of the Nava-Kampa verses8is unknown. But some lines of this stuti
can be found in a number of dhāran ̣īs. Of particular interest, the
Susiddhikara-s ūtra, a text known from the Chinese translation of
726, includes phrases parallel to those at the beginning of the
Nava-Kampa . Moreover, the Nava-Kampa seems to suggest that after
recitation there would be brought about perfection in all actions
(sarva-karma-siddhi-karam āvartayis ̣yāmi), which is somewhat in line
with the title and purpose of the Susiddhikara-s ūtra. Thus, it looks that
the kind of dhāran ̣īs represented by the Nava-Kampa originated in the
cycle or family of this sutra.9
7 By this I mean in a published form including a reliable transliteration with an analysis of
contents, which in most cases will require an integral translation. The few publications
that do exist never satisfy these criteria. What is offered is at most a transliteration, nor-
mally without diacritical marks, and no attempt to analyse the meaning of the sequences
of syllables that are read.
8Sic. The Navakampa , edited by Goudriaan and Hooykaas ( 1971 )a sstuti nr. 510, is actu-
ally a prose text.
9 Based on photographs of the Borobudur lead-bronze inscription I have recently obtained,
and the textual correspondence brilliantly observed by Hudaya Kandahjaya, I have
re-edited the text of the inscription, and can state that the correspondences concern
almost the whole of the inscription and the Navakampa . The link with the
Susiddhikara , preserved only in Chinese and Tibetan, cannot be confirmed and I have
thus far failed to find any scriptural identification (see Griffiths 2014).WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 139

--- [Page 6] ---
A few years later, Boechari published an article on ritual deposits from Candi
Gumpung ( 1985a =2012 : 453 –65), a shrine in the temple complex of Muara
Jambi in Sumatra. The names of man ̣d ̣aladeities inscribed on numerous leaves
of gold are not mantra s, but nevertheless deserve to be mentioned here, for they
are evidence of the spread to Indonesia of Mantranaya Buddhism10with its
focus on rituals involving man ̣d ̣alas, of which we will encounter other traces
in the present study. The material attracted the attention of Max Nihom
(1998 ), who elucidated it from the perspective of his knowledge of
Indo-Tibetan Buddhist literature.
I will not enter here into the issue of a possible distinction between the
terms mantra anddhāran ̣ī, and will use them with a considerable amount of
overlap, as do the original Buddhist texts in which we encounter them. It is
important, however, to make clear that together they represent a text type that
is quite clearly different, in form and content, from the class here called
gāthā. Unlike gāthās, which use metrical form and no bījasyllables, perhaps
the clearest marker of mantra s and dhāran ̣īs is the circumposition of om ̇...
svāhā/phat ̣. It is common in the Indonesian secondary literature for all
Buddhist texts cited in inscriptions indiscriminately to be referred to as man-
tra.11And it must be admitted that the boundaries between these categories
were blurred even among ancient Indonesian Buddhists. The common conjunc-
tion of the Prat ītyasamutp ādagāthāwith texts that are clearly dhāran ̣īs, and the
existence of an abbreviated form of the famous gāthāasom ̇ye te sv āhā,12are
clear indications of this. As previous scholars have emphasized, this blurring of
categories can be explained as resulting from the fact that these different categor-
ies of Buddhist literature could be put to use in the same way. It is because of
this overlap between gāthās, on the one hand, and dhāran ̣īs/mantra s on the
other, in the epigraphical record, that both categories are covered in the selection
of material presented in this study.
This material comprises inscriptions recovered from Sambas in west Borneo,
from a shipwreck on the bottom of the Java sea off the northern coast of Java,
from the southern tip of Sumatra, from central Java, and from Bali, thus covering
a substantial part of the textual and geographical depth and breadth of ancient
Buddhism in the Indonesian archipelago (see map, Figure 1 ). While most of
the material is published here for the first time, some has been published p revious-
ly but without identification of source texts. Indeed, use of modern compu terized
text corpora in many cases allows pinpointing of the textual sources of such
inscriptions. The proper identification of the source text (or at least of close par-
allels) is, in turn, often of considerable help in determining accurate readings of
these documents, some of which have come to us in very poor physical condition.
The material presented here is the result of rather unsystematic data
gathering on this type of inscriptions during the years 2008 to 2012. It does
not pretend to offer anything like exhaustive coverage of all of the Indonesian
10 On this term, used here instead of the term Vajray āna (or Tantray āna) more familiar to
most Indonesian scholars, see Cruijsen, Griffiths and Klokke ( forthcoming ).
11 See e.g. Machi Suhadi 1989 .
12 For a discussion of this abbreviated formula, and a list of known cases, see Cruijsen et al.
forthcoming, n. 50.140 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 7] ---
inscriptions whose texts might be classified as Buddhist mantra so rdhāran ̣īs. I
have omitted cases for which there is no specific reason to assume that they are
Buddhist,13cases for which I lack any reliable reading or reproductions allowing
me to verify existing readings,14and cases which have already been prepared for
publication elsewhere.15
1. Silver foil inscription from Sambas, West Kalimantan
In the annual report of the Archaeological Service in the Dutch East Indies
(Oudheidkundig Verslag ,OV) for the year 1948, in §6 dealing with
“Discoveries ”, we find an entry on Sambas (West Borneo, now West
Kalimantan province), which reads (p. 13):16
Figure 1. Map by Véronique Degroot. The numbers refer to the sections of this
article.
13 E.g. the interesting inscription presenting the Kawi alphabet arranged in small groups of
aks ̣aras enclosed within om ̇...svāhā(Brandes 1889 ), devoid of any indication of reli-
gious affiliation. [See addition on p. 187.]
14 E.g. the inscribed gold foil from Candi Bogang, which is almost certainly Buddhist but
for which only an eye-copy is available (Djoko Dwiyanto 1985 : 443 and facsimile on
pp. 453 –4). The eye-copy is clearly not faithful to the original since only fragments
can be understood. Among the readable parts, it seems likely that the inscription ends
with anena c āham ̇kuśalena karmman ̣ābhaveya buddho na ciren ̣a loke de śeya
dharmmañ jagato hit āya ||, i.e. the first three-quarters of the stanza identified in the
Pulau Sawah inscription (see n. 2). Another probable dhāran ̣īinscription is the one cap-
tured, not very legibly, on OD photo 17343 (see n. 49 on OD photos). See also n. 149
below for some East Javanese specimens not discussed here.
15 I have in mind the items included in the forthcoming publications by Cruijsen, Griffiths
and Klokke ( forthcoming ); by Griffiths, Revire and Sanyal ( 2013 ); and by Griffiths
(2014 ) alone.
16 I have translated into English all citations from Dutch and Indonesian sources made in
this article.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 141

--- [Page 8] ---
In 1939 an earthenware jar was found, standing on a bronze leaf and covered
by a bronze discus, in the ground on the bank of the eponymous river.17The
jar was damaged during excavation and contained 18 small statues, among
which 8 in gold, the remaining ones in silver and bronze, of Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas, and a censer in bronze, in the form of a house. Right after
the report of the discovery these objects disappeared, but they resurfaced
after the war, now in the possession of Mr. Tan Yeok Song, President of
the South Seas Society at Singapore, who had bought them and secured
them in the Oversea Chinese Bank. At this time only 7 golden and 2 silver
statues, besides the censer, remain. Mr. Tan offered a provisional publica-
tion, accompanied by photos, of this collection (Preliminary Report on the
Discovery of the Hoard of Hindu Religious Objects, near Sambas, West
Borneo, Singapore 1948).18
Subsequently, the September 1949 issue of the Journal of the Malayan Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society (vol. 22, pt. 4) was dedicated entirely to the Sambas
finds, with papers contributed by Roland Bradell, Nilakanta Sastri, H.G.
Quaritch Wales, Tom Harrisson and Tan Yeok Seong. No mention was made
in this publication of any inscription as part of these finds. The collection was
acquired by the British Museum in 1956, and the technical staff of the
Museum then discovered that a rolled-up silver foil had been hidden in the
base of the largest sculpture of the Sambas hoard (object 1, plates 1 and 2 in
JMBRAS 22/4, 1949). At some moment after being unrolled, this foil broke
into two fragments, currently kept at the British Museum under registration num-
ber 1956,0725.8.b.19Putting the two fragments close together, we can determine
that the original would have been about 16 cm in length and 2.35 cm in height.
As far as I know, the inscription on this silver foil, covering both sides, has
only rarely been mentioned in the scholarly literature and remains unpub-
lished.20I will first present my reading of this document, then I will analyse
its contents and discuss the importance of this artefact for the history of
Buddhism and Buddhist art in Indonesia.
Text
The foil is extremely hard to capture in its entirety photographically. After
repeated provisional attempts based on different photographs offered by
17 For more details on the provenance of the discoveries that concern us here, see now
McKinnon 1994 : 23.
18 Note 1: “Journal of the South Seas Society, vol. V, part 1, June 1948, p. 31 –42. Also
compare O.V. 1939, p. 6 ”.
19 There is unusually detailed information, with photographs made before and after the
extraction process, available in the online British Museum database under the registration
number 1956,0725.8.a, analysis reference number PR00742 (last accessed 26 July 2012).
20 A newspaper item in the Evening News , London, of which a clipping is found among the
documents put online by the British Museum, announced a publication by D.E. Barrett
and J.G. de Casparis scheduled to appear in the British Museum Quarterly . No such pub-
lication has ever seen the light of day. The inscription on silver foil is listed in Ricklefs
and Voorhoeve ( 1977 : 55), with the information that it “is in Sanskrit, according to Dr.
J.G. de Casparis ”.142 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 9] ---
Michael Willis, and a tracing of the letters as observed by his research assistant
Beatriz Cifuentes (without knowledge of the script), I was able to determine the
reading from the original at the British Museum on 20 June 2012, using a micro-
scope. As we will see on some other specimens of mantra/dh āran ̣īinscriptions
included in this article, the writing is sloppy, so that it often takes some goodwill
to read a given aks ̣arain a way that makes sense. I subjoin photos of the original
both with and without the mentioned tracing ( Figures 2 and3). While it does not
seem necessary to point out all scribal errors, my notes anticipate some of the
textual identifications made after the decipherment is presented.21
Obverse:
(1)// na[ma] (° ār)yyā(na)[x n]tabh ādrā22// yāvada k āci da śaddiśi loke
sarvvatriy ādhvaganara narasi(h)h ā23tāhu(2)tān ahna24vanda[mi] (sa)rvva
°aśes ̣ām ̇(k)āyatu v ācamanena prasannah ̣// yāśca °imam ̇parin ̣āmanar ā(3)
narāda(m·) x tva25(sa)kr ̥j janayed adhimukti (vo)dhivaram anupr ārthayam āno
°agru vi śis ̣t ̣a bha (4)[ve]d i[mu] p[u]n ̣ya(m·) //26raks ̣oghn āparam āhy es ̣ā
pavitr āpāpanāsaśanīśrīka(r)īdhī-
Reverse:
(1)27karīcāt ̣i28sarvvagun ̣avivarddhan ī// ye dharmm āhyetoprabhav āhetun tes ̣ā(2)ñ
ca yo [n]irodho hy evam·v ādīmahāśramanah ̣// ye m ām ̇(rū)pen ̣a °adr āks ̣u(3)
ye m ām ̇[gho](s ̣e)n ̣a °anvayuh ̣mathyy āprahān ̣aprasr ̥tāna m ādraks ̣yanti te
21 In this article, I use the following editorial conventions: graphic elements wholly lost or
wholly unreadable on the inscribed object but restorable on the basis of philological con-
siderations are placed in [ ...]; graphic elements whose reading is visually uncertain but
philologically probable, or vice versa, are placed in ( ...); readings that are merely mech-
anical renderings of what I think I see on the object are printed in italics; a letter x repre-
sents one totally illegible aks ̣ara; a capital letter C indicates one illegible consonant; a
raised circle ° precedes independent ( aks ̣ara) vowel signs; a median dot · represents
thevirāmasign.
22 (°ār)yyā(na)[x n]tabh ādrā: it appears to be impossible to restore here āryasamantabhadr ā,
or any other reading with samanta ,f o rt h e naafter ° āryyāis relatively certain, and there
seems not to be sufficient space for two aks ̣arassama between this and [n]tabh ādrā.A l l
in all, the opening of the inscription, with an apparent nama lacking the expected following
oblique case form, remains unclear.
23 narasi(h)h ā: presumably narasin ̇hāis intended, but it seems impossible to read n ̇.
24 The beginning of this line repeats the beginning of the pāda tān ahu ... that had been
commenced, albeit in corrupt form, at the end of line 1. The hnais a mistake for hu,
caused by misplacement of the top horizontal bar of what should have been a jain
line 3.
25 There are more aks ̣aras incised at the beginning of this line than one would have
expected from comparison with the Bhadracaripran ̣idhāna. The jahas been miswritten
asdaby misplacement of its top horizontal bar across what should have been huin line 2.
It seems that narāis again a case of repetition at the transition between lines. The syllable
before tvashould be śru, but cannot be recognized as such. I guess that there is m· just
before this, as the scribe seems to have an inclination to use m· rather than m ̇. See the next
line, and verso line 2.
26 p[u]n ̣ya(m·) //: the presence of m· between n ̣yaand the punctuation is uncertain. There
may not be any sign expressing the expected final consonant.
27 There is a sequence scratched out at the start of this line.
28 cāt ̣i: this can probably be understood as a misrepresentation of caiva in the exemplar.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 143

--- [Page 10] ---
Figure 2. The Sambas foil, obverse and reverse.144 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 11] ---
Figure 3. The Sambas foil, obverse and reverse, with tracing of the aks ̣aras by Beatriz Cifuentes.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 145

--- [Page 12] ---
janāh ̣|||(4)dra yam ̇bhadra[pra]nidh āna29°ini candravarmma x (na)ta (p)una ° ā
(va)tu CCi x (na)ta(rañca) hi x30
Analysis
The text constituting lines 1 –3 of the obverse can be identified with the follow-
ing two disconnected verses in the Bhadracar īorBhadracaripran ̣idhāna, the
famous Bodhisattva vow that once circulated independently but came to be
transmitted as the last part of the Gan ̣d ̣avyūhasūtra. I cite the text from the edi-
tion of Watanabe ( 1912 ):
yāvata keci da śaddiśi loke sarvatriyadhvagat ānarasim ̇hāh ̣|
tān ahu vandami sarvi a śes ̣ānkāyatu v ācamanena prasannah ̣|| 1 ||
yaśca imam ̇parin ̣āmanar ājam ̇śrutva sakr ̥j janayed adhimuktim |
bodhivar ām anupr ārthayam āno agru vi śis ̣t ̣a bhaved imu pun ̣yam || 48 ||
From the recent integral translation by Osto ( 2010 ):
Filled with faith, I honor with my body, speech and mind all the Lions
among Men without exception who abide in all three times, in the
world with its ten directions.
And whoever has heard this King of Spiritual Maturation, seeking after the
blessing of enlightenment, may [that one] at once make the resolution [for
enlightenment]. May the merit [from this] be the foremost and most
excellent.
After these two verses follows a verse that is known to me elsewhere only in the
Mah āpratisar āmah āvidyārājñī, albeit with the difference that all the nominal
forms are neuter in that version (Hidas 2012 : 188 and 248):
raks ̣oghnam ̇paramam ̇hy etat pavitram ̇pāpanāśanam |
śrīkaram ̇dhīkaram ̇caiva sarvagun ̣avivardhanam ||
This is the foremost demon-slayer, the pure one, the destroyer of misdeeds.
It brings about prosperity and wisdom, and increases all sorts of virtues.
The feminine forms we see may be explained as implying a word such as cary āor
dhāran ̣ī, neither of which is actually found in the preserved portion of the text.
Next we read a truncated version of the ye dharm āh ̣formula. The sequence of
scriptural extracts is then terminated by a verse that I have identified in the
Vajracchedik āPrajñ āpāramit ā, §26. In the widely used edition by Conze
(1957 ), the verse runs as follows:31
29 There is space for one wide or two thin aks ̣aras between bhadra andnidh āna. The most
suitable restitution would seem to be [pra] .
30 Instead of twice (na), one could read twice (ru)in the problematic final sequence of this
line.
31 This verse is not preserved in the Schøyen manuscript, and hence does not appear in the
edition of that manuscript recently published by Harrison and Watanabe ( 2006 ).146 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 13] ---
ye m ām ̇rūpen ̣acādrāks ̣ur ye m ām ̇ghos ̣en ̣acānvayuh ̣|
mithy āprahān ̣aprasr ̥tāna m ām ̇draks ̣yanti te jan āh ̣||
The same verse is also quoted, without attribution to this specific text, in
Candrak īrti’sPrasannapad āonMūlamādhyamikak ārikā22.16 (de la Vallée
Poussin, 1903 –13: 448), with the reading ghos ̣en ̣a anvayuh ̣that we also see
in our inscription and is confirmed by the Gilgit manuscript edited by
Schopen ( 1989b : 105, folio 10b6). I quote Harrison ’s translation ( 2006 : 156):32
Whoever saw me through my physical form, Whoever followed me
through the sound of my voice, Engaged in the wrong endeavours,
Those people will not see me.
Unfortunately it is impossible to decipher all of the last line of the inscription,
which comprises a prose portion apparently composed in Old Malay. In the
sequence yam ̇bhadrapranidh āna ini candravarmma we may recognize the
Malay words yang and ini, which could yield the meaning “this vow to do
good of Candravarman ”, but one cannot exclude the possibility that yam ̇is
intended as a Sanskrit word, and so even these readable parts of the line cannot,
alas, be translated with certainty. But what seems evident is that this compilation
of scriptural verses constitutes the vow ( pran ̣idhāna) of a figure named
Candravarman.33
There is no obvious connection between the verses. If the verse that I have
identified in the Mah āpratisar āmah āvidyārājñīis indeed taken from there and
not from another, unknown, source, then we have here a further piece of (indir-
ect) evidence concerning the cult of Mah āpratisar āin maritime South-East
Asia.34More importantly, in the light of Schopen ’s much-cited publication
(1989a [2005 ]: 300) emphasizing the great historical importance of an Indian
inscription from Nalanda that cites verse 46 of the Bhadracar ī, not only because
“it contains the only verse of the Bhadracaripran ̣idhānaknown to occur in an
Indian epigraph ”, but more specifically because “this verse is the only passage
from a Mah āyāna text so far known to occur in an Indian inscription ”(emphasis
Schopen), with the exception of “several specifically identifiable dhāran ̣īs[...]
found at a number of sites ”, the fact that we now find two other verses from it
cited in this Indonesian inscription, alongside other verses from Mah āyāna scrip-
tures, is certainly remarkable.35However, Schopen himself also adduced evi-
dence suggesting that “The Bhadracar īitself apparently came to be classified
32 The reference to the Prasannapad āis to be added to Harrison ’s list of parallels (n. 114).
33 On the term pran ̣idhānain connection with Buddhist inscriptions from India and
Indonesia, see C œdès1930 : 43.
34 On this cult, see Cruijsen et al. (forthcoming).
35 The fact that the Bhadracar īhad been received in ancient Indonesia was thus far only
known from the wordless testimony of relief panels at Borobudur (see Bosch 1938 ).
Our inscription yields the first written evidence. More generally on the issue of citation
of Mah āyāna-inspired verses occurring in inscriptions, I recall the one or two Indonesian
inscriptions citing a verse that is identifiable, among other sources, in the
Suvarn ̣abhāsottamas ūtra(see notes 2 and 14 above). See also the epigraphical citation
of a passage possibly taken from the Bodhisattvabh ūmidiscussed below, p. 183.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 147

--- [Page 14] ---
as a ‘dhāran ̣ītext’at some stage ”, and that “if the Bhadracar īwas so classified
already in the tenth century, then the verse that occurs in our inscription may
have to be considered only another instance of a ‘dhāran ̣ī’in an Indian inscrip-
tion ”(1989a [2005 ]: 304 n. 12). The Sambas inscription seems to throw import-
ant new light on these problems.
Like the Nalanda inscription, ours lacks circumposed om ̇...svāhā.
This seems to be in conformity with the fact that the text appears to characterize
itself as a pran ̣idhāna, which is in principle not a category of scripture
(buddhavacana “Buddha word ”), and that it comprises two verses from the
famous Bhadracaripran ̣idhāna, which is a text uttered by the Bodhisattva
Samantabhadra. The compilation also comprises the ye dharm āh ̣formula,
which is not buddhavacana either, for this stanza was uttered by the disciple
Aśvajit (see Boucher 1991 :5–6), although it is hard to imagine a stanza that
would be more quintessentially scriptural. The text is concluded by a stanza
that was explicitly uttered by the Buddha in the first person. The use to
which this inscription was put, being inserted into a Buddha image, strongly
suggests that this compilation served the same function as the proper dhāran ̣īs
presented in this study, the juxtaposition of its elements being occasioned by
their shared sacredness, which makes them suitable as “dharma relics ”.36
Now we would like to know how to date the inscription. First, the sculpture
into whose base it was inserted is stylistically dateable to about the eighth cen-
tury, and belongs to an iconographic type not entirely foreign to Java, but appar-
ently better represented in Sumatra and the Malay peninsula.37But since
the silver foil must have been inserted into the base at some point after the
time of manufacture,38the probable eighth-century dating and provenance out-
side of Java are not necessarily applicable to the inscription itself.
From a palaeographic point of view, I would prima facie estimate the inscrip-
tion to date from the ninth century. It is written in Kawi script, and the only
dated inscriptions in this form of writing from the eighth century –all from
the island of Java –are the Plumpungan (Central Java, 750 CE), Dinaya (East
Java, 760 CE) and Mañju śrīgr ̥ha inscriptions (Central Java, 792 CE), while the
36 Cf. Bentor 1995 : 250 –52. It is pertinent (if my restitution is correct) that the final prose
part uses precisely the term pran ̣idhāna, which is in principle a different textual category,
apparently denoting here the compilation as a whole. Unfortunately the damaged state of
the text does not allow us to understand with certainty the author ’s intent in using the
term.
37 Cf. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke ( 1988 : item 55) for a bronze specimen from South
Sumatra (cf. item 4, of unknown provenance, assigned to Java). Sastri ( 1949 :1 8 –19)
refers to two stone sculptures from Sumatra. For one of these, and a third Sumatran spe-
cimen, see Brinkgreve and Sulistianingsih 2009 : figures 5.1, 5.5. For a systematic study
of this iconographic type, with numerous examples from peninsular Thailand and
Malaysia, see Griswold 1966 . Our Buddha, with both hands held up and both shoulders
covered, belongs to Griswold ’s type “1/c”. For references to Indonesian specimens see
p. 65, n. 72 and p. 68, n. 91; for the dating of two comparable Dv āravat īspecimens
to the eighth century, see p. 69.
38 According to archaeologists Véronique Degroot and Dominique Soutif, whom I have
consulted on this matter, it seems technically impossible that the insertion would have
taken place into the earthen core before the silver statue was cast. Nevertheless, the
foil itself may of course have been produced at an earlier point in time.148 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 15] ---
ninth century is much more densely populated by dated inscriptions on that
island. Moreover, the remarkable tilted shape of the aks ̣ara ma seen in the
Sambas foil appears to be a characteristic of some Javanese inscriptions of the
mid-ninth century;39for instance the stone inscription of Wayuku dated 776
śaka= 856 CEdepicted in pl. 3 of Brandes 1913 ,40whose script seems identical
to that on the Sambas inscription. The same feature is observed in the lead-
bronze plate with a dhāran ̣īinscription from Borobudur, mentioned above,
which was dated by Boechari to the mid-ninth century on palaeographic
grounds, and it is observed again on the Nan Han-Cirebon gold foil presented
below in section 4; by contrast, this feature seems to be absent from the
Dinaya inscription. On the other hand, our inscription does seem to show a
more archaic shape of the virāma(see rev., l. 2 evam·v ādī), which is written
above the consonant that it affects, than the partially turned variant that we
see once in the Wayuku inscription.41
All in all, it must be observed that there is very little difference between the
Kawi script observed on the Wayuku inscription and that from Dinaya, which is
nearly a hundred years older, and that the existence of three dated inscriptions
from the second half of the eighth century makes it almost certain that the
script was in use decades earlier. Louis-Charles Damais has attributed a substan-
tial number of undated inscriptions using Kawi script, engraved on metalwork,
to the second half of the eighth century, admitting that “pour ce groupe de
documents de « 700 –750 » Śaka, les marges d ’erreur peuvent être assez
grandes ”, implying the possibility of a dating bracket 650 –700 Śaka, which
would place them in the second and third quarters of the eighth century CE.42
So we cannot rule out that our Sambas foil, despite the features it seems to
share with the Wayuku inscription, belongs to the eighth, and perhaps even to
the first half of the eighth, century. Is there any reason to favour a dating to
the first half of the eighth century and to go against the prima facie palaeograph-
ic estimate?
The answer may be affirmative, if we choose to identify the Candravarman of
our inscription with king Zhandabo 旃達鉢, known from a single Chinese
source, the Xin Tang shu , which reports his embassy to the Tang court in
39 I do not know any discussion of this feature in the scholarly literature on Javanese palae-
ography. See Griffiths ( 2011 : 155 –6) for my argument defending the methodological
permissibility of attempting to date non-Javanese inscriptions by comparison with
dated Javanese ones.
40 This publication cites the millésime 779, based on an incorrect reading which was sub-
sequently corrected by Damais ( 1951 :2 9 –31 and 1952 :3 0 –31).
41 In fact we see one archaic virāmain l. 3 sisair ·, and one more developed example, at
the end of the same line: manusuk ·. It may be noted here that the shape of the virāma
in the Borobudur lead-bronze plate is totally aberrant, being subscribed in the manner
of the N āgarīvirāma, a feature that is not known to me from any other early Kawi
inscription, although it reappears much later (no doubt based on independent develop-
ments) in West Javanese inscriptions and manuscripts from the fifteenth –sixteenth
century.
42 See Damais 1970 :4 3 –4: the citation is from n. 8, on p. 43. See also the (very short and
somewhat outdated) discussion of the archaic phase of Kawi script in De Casparis ’hand-
book ( 1975 :2 8 –30).WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 149

--- [Page 16] ---
669 CE,43and situates this king, whose name can plausibly be interpreted as a
phonetic representation of Candrava(rma), in a country called Boluo 波羅.
There has been a long debate about the identification of this country, some
authors proposing Borneo, while Wolters ( 1967 : 186) situates it in northern or
north-eastern Sumatra.44Admittedly one might argue that the connection with
Borneo is immaterial, since Candravarman may have originated from elsewhere
in the archipelago, and the Sambas hoard as a whole may have been buried in
West Borneo after the metalwork had been brought there from across the sea.
On the other hand, there is considerable evidence for relatively old Buddhist
presence on the western and north-western coasts of Borneo, so a local
Candravarman in the early eighth century CEwould not be unexpected.45
Whatever the date and original provenance of these artefacts, the Sambas
silver foil is precious not only from a textual point of view, but also as an arch-
aeological artefact. This is probably the only case of an Indonesian inscription
engraved on metal foil such as this being found inside a sculpture, photographed
in that state, then extracted and unrolled, finally leading to the decipherment of
the text. As repeatedly stressed by Yael Bentor ( 1995 ), there is ample evidence
from various Buddhist texts showing that the insertion of dharma -relics into
images was a widespread practice, besides the practice of inserting them into
stūpas. The examples of such a practice preserved in India are apparently not
numerous.46The practice was widespread in Indonesia (and other parts of
South-East Asia), but no case is as richly documented as this one.47
2. Stone inscription of Batu Bedil in Lampung
Let us move now to that great bastion of Buddhism in Indonesia, the island of
Sumatra. In the far south of this island, in the province of Lampung, there is a
complex of megalithic sites now known as Batu Bedil (Rifle Stone), after the
most eye-catching megalith. It seems to have been the German ethnographer
Friedrich W. Funke who first discovered this complex in 1953, and found
43 Bradell ( 1949 ) gives a misprint: 699. The year is given as 669 by Luce ( 1924 : 176) and
Wolters ( 1967 : 186).
44 Bradell ( 1949 : 4) assumes that this may denote (a part of) Borneo. See also Wolters
1967 , n. 94 on p. 326. For a recent exposition of the very tangled web of place names
and geographical indications in which the toponym Boluo must be interpreted, see
Ptak 1998 : 120 –26.
45 See McKinnon 1994 and Bambang Budi Utomo 2006 .
46 Bentor ( 1995 : 254) cites just two archaeological examples from India.
47 I refer, for visual evidence, to the British Museum website cited in the notes above. For other
Indonesian cases, without a systematic survey of the relevant publications, I may here refe r at
random to OV1948, p. 30 (about Candi Plaosan Lor): “A small bronze statue of a two-armed
Bodhisattva, presumably representing Padmap ān ̣i, was found during the excavation of the
floor of the northern cella of the principal shrine on the South, with the folded silver foil
with a dhāran ̣īstill visible in the bottom of its base ”. Another interesting find is the fragment
of silverfoil extracted from the silver Mañju śrīstatue from Ngemplan Semongan, discussed
by Bosch 1929 : 45. Quite a number of further references to finds of the colonial period are
cited in the article by F.J. Domela Nieuwenhuis ( 1983 ). For some more recent finds, see
also Nugrahani et al. ( 1998 : 18 and photos 27 –8); for some cases from Camp ā,n o ty e tp r o p -
erly published, see John Guy 2011 :3 1 8 –9.150 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 17] ---
there a large inscribed stone (Batu Surat) at about 40 m from a field marked by
twenty-seven menhirs arranged in a square (originally probably 8 × 8 stones,
arranged regularly over 40 × 40 m).48In1958 , he published an extensive report
of his findings (see especially pp. 20 –22), including a ground plan of the field
of menhirs in relation to the Batu Surat (pl. I), with a good photo of the inscription
(fig. 8 on plate III). He assumed that the position of the inscribed stone in relation
to the field of menhirs indicated a significant correlation; he also speculated (p. 21
n. 3) that the text of the inscription would be in Old Sundanese. Both of these
speculations were rightly rejected by van der Hoop in a very critical review of
Funke ’s book (v.d. Straaten and v.d. Hoop 1960 : 285).
The site was visited again, in 1954, by a team of Indonesian and foreign
archaeologists during a voyage of exploration that has become famous thanks
to the full reports published by the leader of the team, Soekmono, on two occa-
sions (1955 and 1962 ), both with the inscription illustrated in the form of the OD
photo 19576.49In the 1955 report (pp. 49 –50), we find much more reliable
information on the inscription:
The measurements of this stone are 1.85 × 0.72 × 0.55 m. Its characters
are ±5 cm in height, and there are 10 lines. Below this inscribed portion
there is an attractive lotus flower, resembling the thrones of statues of
deities. Although its characters are big, the middle portion of the stone
is very worn, so that its decipherment is very difficult. From what it
was possible to read on the spot, it is clear that the language that is
used for the inscription is Sanskrit (in line 1 we read namo bhagawate
a n di nl i n e1 0 swāhā). There is no year, but the shape of the characters
points to the end of the 9thor the beginning of the 10thcentury. Namo
bhagawate as beginning and swāhāas end give reason to suspect that
this text is some kind of mantra . Only it is difficult to determine whether
the religion is Buddhist or Śaiva, most probably Buddhist. If this is the
case, then there is hope that it will be possible to read the complete
stone, for there are many Buddhist mantra s (called dhāran ̣īs) whose
expressions are similar.50
48 This complex of a field of menhirs and the inscribed stone is in turn about 60 m from the
Batu Bedil. A specific relationship with the latter monolith has not been established.
49 A database comprising all of the more than 21,000 of these “OD”photos that arrived in
public Dutch collections prior to the late 1950s, before contacts between Indonesian and
Dutch institutions finally became too severely weakened after decolonization, is search-
able at https://socrates.leidenuniv.nl (under the collection “Kern Institute ”: use prefix
“OD- ”with hyphen for searches by OD number). A substantial number of photographs
are already available in digital form, including the OD photos cited in this article, and can
be viewed through the Leiden website.
50 On p. 35 of the same report, a few more details of the reading were given, so that the
following readings can be inferred from pp. 35 and 50 together:
(1)namo bhagavate
(2)aparimitya -
(3)-- vini ( ) ita -
(10) ... sv āhā
The report was carefully summarized in French by Damais 1963 : 562. The voyage andWRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 151

--- [Page 18] ---
More or less the same facts were mentioned by Damais ( 1962 : 283 –4, n. 5), who
had himself participated in the voyage. He announced that a publication by J.G.
de Casparis was forthcoming, but this has never materialized.51I visited the site
myself in September 2011, and was able to make the estampage of which a
photograph is included here ( Figure 4 ). Although I still find three of the ten
lines totally unreadable, I can publish a greater part of the inscription here
because I am able to confirm the suspicion voiced by Soekmono that it is a
known dhāran ̣ī, and have identified its source: the Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtra. With
this source text in hand, I am able to read a number of aks ̣aras (here printed
in italic) that it would otherwise probably have been impossible to decipher.
(1)|| namo bhagavate
(2)°aparimit āyurjñ ā-
(3)nasuviniścitate-
Figure 4. EFEO estampage n. 2043 of the Batu Bedil inscription.
the epigraphic discovery are mentioned only briefly in Soekmono 1962 (pp. 5 and 7; pl.
1 = OD 19576), again translated into French by Damais 1967 : 686 –7.
51 Thus Boechari ( 1979 :5= 1981 : 84, n. * = 2012 : 565 n. 4) still reported the inscription as
unpublished, “owing to its very weathered condition ”.152 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 19] ---
(4)jorājāya ta thā-
(5)gatāyārhate sa-
(6)...
(7)...
(8)...
(9)svabh āvapari śuddhe ma-
(10) hānayapariv āre sv āhā
These elements are sufficient to exclude the possibility that we are dealing with
any other known dhāran ̣ī. We may initially compare the reading with the text of
thedhāran ̣īin the Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtra, edited on the basis of Nepalese manu-
scripts by Konow 1916 : 301:
om ̐namo bhagavate aparimit āyurjñ ānasuvini ścitatejor ājāya tath āgatāyārhate
samyaksambuddh āya | tadyath ā,o m ̐pun ̣yamah āpun ̣ya aparimit āpun ̣ya
aparimit āyupun ̣ya jñ ānasambh āropacite | om ̐sarvasam ̇skārapari śuddha-
dharmate gagan ̣asamudgate svabh āvapari śuddhe mah ānayapariv āre svāhā||
But comparison with the version of the dhāran ̣īin the Khotanese manuscript
(dating to about the middle of the tenth century CE)52that was edited in parallel
by Konow, on the facing page of his edition, immediately shows that the
Nepalese manuscripts, which are approximately 700 years more recent, give
an expanded text:53
namau bhagavate aparamitt āyujñānasuvini ścitatejaur ājāya tath āgataya rhite
samyatsabuddh āya tadyath āaum sarvasam ̇skārapari śuddhadharmate gaga-
nasamudgatte śvabh āvaviśuddhe mah ānayaparivare sv āhā
That this shorter text is older, and that the Nepalese manuscripts transmit an
expanded version, is suggested by the fact that all three versions included in the
Taish ōedition of the Chinese canon show variants of the same short version.54
52 See Duan Qing ([ 1992 ]: 12). This dating estimate was confirmed to me by Prods Oktor
Skjaervø (email 11/09/2012).
53 See also the synoptic edition provided by Duan Qing ([ 1992 ]: 133), indicating clearly
that parts are shared by the Khotanese and Nepalese transmission, and that parts are
absent in the former.
54 Rolf Giebel (email 3/10/2011) and Iain Sinclair (email 1/10/2011) kindly furnished me
the references to and citations of Taish ō936Dacheng Wuliangshou jing 大乘無量壽經
“Mahāyāna Sūtra of Aparimit āyus”(19: 82a –84c, translated by Facheng in the ninth cen-
tury), T. 937 Dacheng sheng Wuliangshou jueding guangming wang rulai tuoluoni jing
大乘聖無量壽決定光明王如來陀羅尼經 “Mahāyāna S ūtra of the Dh āran ̣īof the
Tathāgata Āryāparimitasuvini ścitatejor āja”(19: 85b, translated 988) and T. 1389
Wuliangshou dazhi tuoluoni 無量壽大智陀羅尼“Dhāran ̣īof the Great Knowledge of
Aparimit āyus”(21: 907b, translated 996). T. 936 and 937 are both translations of the
Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtra, the latter being a shorter version; T. 936 gives the dhāran ̣ī29
times in all, while T. 937 gives it only once. T. 1389 consists solely of the dhāran ̣ī.
All three texts give the dhāran ̣īin phonetic transcription, each showing nearly the
same text, all omitting om ̐, with ° tejo° being absent in T. 936, and T. 936 –7 reading
svabh āvaviśuddhe , while T. 1389 reads svabh āvaśuddhe , to mention the principal var-
iants; the few other variants are not significant for comparison with our inscription.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 153

--- [Page 20] ---
Although our inscription is totally worn in the middle of the dhāran ̣ī,w em a yd e d u c e
from the fact that the preserved lines show an average of seven aks ̣aras per line that
there would certainly not have been enough space for the sequence tadyath āom ̐
pun ̣yamah āpun ̣ya aparimit āpun ̣ya aparimit āyupun ̣ya jñ ānasambh āropacite .55In
other words, our inscription was engraved with a variant of the original shorter
version of the dhāran ̣ī, and it must be noted that compared to the Khotanese and
Chinese versions, ours may have been even shorter, for the number of syllables
on lines 6 –8 will have been about 21, whereas the number of syllables required to
obtain the text of those other versions is 28. In this connection, it is a striking fact
that the Sūtraitself repeatedly states that the dhāran ̣īconsists of 108 syllables,
which it only does in the longer Nepalese recension. In the present context, I am
unable to throw any light on this numerical problem.
In his recent article dedicated to the text, Richard K. Payne has drawn atten-
tion to the fact that the Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtraand dependent texts seem to have
been among “the most popular bodies of literature in Nepal, in Dunhuang,
and elsewhere throughout the Buddhist cosmopolis ”(2007 : 277).56The entire
scripture consists of little more than the advice that one should copy, or have
others copy, the sūtra, or the dhāran ̣ī, and promises diverse benefits for those
who do, using i.a. the phrase (Konow 1916 : 315 –7):
yasmin pr ̥thivīprade śa idam aparimit āyuh ̣sūtram ̇likhis ̣yanti likh āpayis ̣yanti,
sa pr ̥thivīprade śah ̣caityabh ūto vandan īyaśca bhavis ̣yati |57
Translation adapted from Silk ( 2004 : 427):
On whatever spot of earth they will write down or will have others write
down this Aparimit āyuh ̣-sūtra, that spot of earth will become a true shrine
and worthy of veneration.
One may wonder why none of these facts were mentioned in Payne ’s discussion of “dif-
fering versions of the Aparimit āyuh ̣Dhāran ̣ī”(2007 : 287 –8); this discussion indeed
entirely neglects the existence of a short and a long recension of the same dhāran ̣ī.
In addition, I may mention here that a very close relative of our dhāran ̣īis found, split in
two, in the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra (Skorupski 1983 :2 7–30):om ̇namo bhagavate
sarvadurgatipari śodhanar ājāya tath āgatāyārhate samyaksambuddh āya | tadyath ā|o m ̇
śodhane śodhane sarvap āpaviśodhani śuddhe vi śuddhe sarvakarm āvaran ̣aviśodhani
svāhā|mūlavidy ā|o m ̇sarvasam ̇skārapari śuddhe dharmate gaganasamudgate sva-
bhāvaviśuddhe mah ānayapariv āre sv āhā|. We will encounter below a variant of the
sequence om ̇śodhane śodhane ...sarvakarm āvaran ̣aviśodhani sv āhā, that is intrusive here.
55 A variant of this sequence seems to have autonomous status among other dhāran ̣īs in the
silver foil from Candi Plaosan Lor presented below, p. 167.
56 This observation and much else in Payne ’s paper is in fact taken over –albeit with
acknowledgement –from an unpublished lecture “The most important Buddhist scrip-
ture? The Aparimit āyurjñ ānaand medieval Buddhism ”, presented by Jonathan Silk in
1999 at the twelfth conference of the International Association of Buddhist Studies at
Lausanne.
57 On the significance of this phrase yasmin pr ̥thivīprade śaetc., see Schopen 1976 [2005 ]:
35, and the recent challenge to Schopen ’s position in Drewes 2007 .154 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 21] ---
It seems reasonable to assume that the ancient local Buddhists who were
involved in the manufacture of our inscription did so with precisely the motiv-
ation of founding a “true shrine ”. More specifically, Soekmono ’s observation
(cited above) that the text is provided with a lotus cushion, just like a Buddha
image would be, is an unmistakeable expression of the intent behind engraving
this text, namely that its presence as dharmak āyawould be equivalent to the
presence of the Buddha, and would sacralize the site.58
It should be noted that there is considerable overlap in the terminology
used by the Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtrato describe, on the one hand, the ways in
which the text (or its dhāran ̣ī) can be used as well as the benefits that will result
from such use and, on the other, the way we see use and benefits described in
other scriptures that will be discussed further on in this article, notably the
Amoghap āśahr ̥daya (section 10).59
Finally, regarding the date of our inscription (which Soekmono situated
around 900 CE, see above), it should be noted that Damais ( 1967 : 687 n. 1)
was inclined to date it about a century older, without specifying the more archaic
traits underlying this estimate. The text is in Kawi script that, frankly, seems less
archaic to me than the script of the Sambas inscription (section 1).60
3. Gold foil from sector Segaran IIA at Batujaya, West Java
During excavations in 2005 at the Buddhist complex of Batujaya, home to the
oldest Buddhist monuments identified in Indonesia so far, the team led by
Pierre-Yves Manguin discovered in the sector called Segaran IIA a piece of
gold foil, folded up into a small squarish lump. When it was unfolded, it turned
out to bear an inscription.61The existence of this inscription, besides that of
other gold foils bearing the ajñānāccīyate formula found at the same site,
was mentioned by Hasan Djafar ( 2010 : 93).62But the inscription so far remains
58 In assimilating expressions of the dharma (dharmapary āya) to the dharma itself, the
authors of certain Buddhist texts, on the basis of the canonical adage yo dhammam ̇pas-
sati so bhagavantam ̇passati “he who sees the dharma , sees the Lord ”, ended up equat-
ingdharmapary āyato Buddha ( bhagavant ). See Schopen 1976 [2005 ]: 50.
59 Schopen ( 1976 [2005 ]: 35) described these two texts as belonging “to that intriguing
genre of Buddhist literature in which almost the whole of a given text is given over to
describing its own great power and the great practical advantages to be gained by reciting
or writing or worshiping it ”.
60 Note the shape of maat the end of line 9 and compare my discussion above. With regard
to Damais ’remark ( 1962 : 284) “Il s ’agit ici encore d ’une variété de l ’écriture
paléo-javanaise et non d ’une variété paléo-sumatranaise ”, I am once again uncertain
how Damais thought he could distinguish palaeo-javanese from palaeo-sumatran script
in this period (cf. Griffiths 2011 : 155 –6). When in an earlier publication Damais intro-
duced these terms ( 1955b : 376), he did not (yet) argue for an earlier dating: “A
Soumatra, l ’écriture pallawa s ’est développée indépendamment et a donné naissance à
un type d ’écriture que l ’on peut appeler paléosoumatranais car il présente des
particularités inconnues ailleurs. Cependant le type d ’écriture paléojavanais s ’y retrouve
aussi, en particulier dans un document découvert récemment, d ’inspiration bouddhique et
rédigé en sanskrit, non daté, mais qui ne saurait être, croyons-nous, postérieur au Xesiècle
E.C.”. The inscription alluded to here is that of Batu Bedil.
61 See Manguin and Agustijanto Indradjaja 2011 : 121, fig. 5.6.
62 See Skilling, forthcoming on the ajñānāccīyate formula.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 155

--- [Page 22] ---
unpublished. Thanks to excellent visual materials furnished by Manguin
(Figure 5 ), I am now able to propose the following reading:
°om ̇°et ̣ana tan no bhadra(m ̇) pracoda(y ā)s vāhā
The reading is rather tentative, for the word et ̣anamakes no sense,63while the
reading yāis also far from secure. I translate:
Om.Et ̣ana(?), may you impel to us that which is good! Svāhā.
Despite the problem posed by et ̣ana, it is clear enough that the dhāran ̣īis an
adaptation of some of the numerous variants of the final line of the G āyatrī
mantra , reading tan no NOM pracoday āt, found in brahmanical literature (see
Bloomfield 1906 :5 0 –51). The word taking the place of NOM is in each instance
the nominative singular case form of the name of a deity. I am unable to trace
this formula in any Buddhist source, but the idea that it is Buddhist finds support
in the monumental context where the foil was discovered.
The palaeographic appearance of the inscription is inconsistent, and com-
prises both some archaic features of Southern Br āhmī(i.e. “Pallava ”) and
some more Kawi-like characteristics. The stratigraphic context in which the arte-
fact was found is somewhat difficult to interpret, the only thing that is certain
being that it must date from before 800 CE. There is a greater archaeological like-
lihood that it belongs to a level dateable to 330 –550 than to the subsequent level
of 550 –700/750.64From the epigraphist ’s point of view, however, this early dat-
ing bracket seems hard to accept. The other gold foil inscriptions from the same
site give a more archaic impression that would more easily be compatible with
such an early dating, although I would still be reluctant even in their case to con-
sider a date before the sixth century.
Figure 5. The foil found at Batujaya, Segaran IIA. Photo EFEO/P.-Y. Manguin.
63 The prima facie readings would rather be dhut ̣anaordhat ̣ana. If one accepts ° et ̣ana, this
can perhaps be explained as a magical word, comparable to “the enigmatic et ̣at ̣ain the
Ākars ̣an ̣amantra ”of the Amoghap āśahr ̥dayadh āran ̣ī(cf. Meisezahl 1962 : 269 and 322).
But such a magical word admittedly does seem rather out of place here.
64 I thank Pierre-Yves Manguin for detailed explanation by email of the stratigraphic
situation.156 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 23] ---
4. Gold foil from the Nan Han period “Cirebon”shipwreck, coast
of West Java
A sunken ship was discovered off the coast of West Java near the city of Cirebon
in 2003. After the cargo had been salvaged, it could be determined that the ship-
wreck must date from about the last quarter of the tenth century, or later.
Alongside large quantities of ceramics and a substantial number of bronze
cult objects, the divers also recovered a piece of gold foil which is inscribed
with a dhāran ̣īof a total of six lines. It is very difficult to produce legible photo-
graphs of this small, irregularly shaped artefact ( Figure 6 ), but Horst Liebner,
who is writing his doctoral thesis about this shipwreck and has had extensive
access to the cargo, has taken considerable effort to document the inscription.
He helped me execute the tracing of the aks ̣aras that is shown here in Figure 6 .65
Obverse:
(1)namo ratnatray āya nama ° āryyāva(lo)-
(2)kiteśvarāya bodhisatv āya mah ā(sa)-
(3)tvāya mah ākā(r)un ̣ikāya tadya(th ā)
(4)°om ̐mārutākuha x k āmāvrāx( mālya)
Reverse:
(1)(prabh ā)devī(°ada)l ān driyase nam(u)
(2)(dha)man de(v) ī
Homage to the Triad of Jewels (Buddha, Dharma and Sam ̇gha)! Homage
to noble Avalokite śvara, the Bodhisattva, the great being, of great compas-
sion. [The mantra is] like this: Om,...of the wind ..., goddess who have
the lustre of ..., you bear ...
Despite the fact that the writing is very faint, and that the photographs available
do not show all parts of the texts with equal focus, it is possible to read more
than half with certainty, due to the fact that the opening (up to the beginning
of line 4 on the obverse) is highly formulaic, being found in a number of
Buddhist scriptures. But I am unfortunately unable to identify the mantra part
65 In an email of 24/08/2012, Liebner provided me with the following information. The
shipwreck was “Discovered in 2003, officially, by fishermen, then reported to a number
of salvage companies. In 2004 excavation license was issued and field campaign started;
finished end 2005. Between early and end 2006 the cargo was virtually locked up; then
only selected people were given access. Divided in two halves last year August.
November 2011 or so the salvage company ’s half was taken to Singapore. I do not
know about the fate of the gold foil; it should be among the collection of the
Indonesian side. The foil was given no. 148341 in the artefact database, officially sur-
faced on 10 Sept 2005, registered as having been found somewhere off starboard aft
of the ship ’s remains. This might be wrong: the photos (from two cameras) I have are
all dated on 07 Sept. If this is the case, it should have been found off starboard midships.
It was initially only accessible after having been surfaced, and then was stored in a bank
safe. November 2006 it was taken out of the bank safe, and the reverse side was photo-
graphed ”. As for the dating of the shipwreck, “There is a clear terminus post quem: An
inscription on a bowl dated CE968 ”. See Liebner 2011 .WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 157

--- [Page 24] ---
that begins with om ̐, and am (therefore) unable to reconstruct the parts that are
not formulaic. Since we find here the words māruta, meaning “wind ”and (if my
reading is correct) driyase , meaning “you are borne ”, it may be suspected that
thedhāran ̣īwas intended to protect against the dangers of voyage at high sea,
and that the object on which it is inscribed was worn as an amulet, while the
text was addressed to the goddess personifying the spell.
For the structure of this dhāran ̣ī,Ir e f e rt ot h e Ekādaśamukha –at e x to ft h e
same genre as the Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtraand the Amoghap āśahr ̥daya referred to in
sections 2 and 10 of this article –of which a copy was found among the Gilgit
manuscripts (seventh century). Here we find a sequence of six repetitively struc-
tured mantric sequences beginning with namo ratnatray āya | namo vairocan āya
tathāgatāya | nama āryāvalokite śvarāya bodhisattv āya mah āsattv āya mah ākārun ̣i-
kāya | nama at ītānāgatapratyutpannebhyah ̣sarvatath āgatebhyo ’rhadbhyah ̣sam-
yaksam ̇buddhebhyah ̣|o m ̇diri diri dhuru dhuru | it ̣t ̣ev i t ̣t ̣e | cale cale | pracale
pracale | kusume kusumavare | ili mili cit ̣is vāhā|and ending with namo
ratnatray āya nama āryāvalokite śvarāya bodhisattv āya mah āsattv āya mah ākāru-
n ̣ikāya | tadyath āpit ̣ip i t ̣it i t ̣i tit ̣i|v i t ̣iv i t ̣i gaccha gaccha bhagavan
āryāvalokite śvara svabhavanam svabhavanam ̇svāhā|[...]āryāvalokite śvara
gaccha svabhavanam || .66
The Sādhanam ālā(eleventh century) furthermore contains three citations
of a Sim ̇hanādadh āran ̣ī“Lion ’s Roar dhāran ̣ī”, that again shows the same
structure (Bhattacharya 1968 : 48, 52, 54, 63): namo ratnatray āya nama
āryāvalokite śvarāya bodhisattv āya mah āsattv āya mah ākārun ̣ikāya tadyath ā
om ̇akat ̣e vikat ̣e nikat ̣ek a t ̣am ̇kat ̣e karot ̣avīrye sv āhā.
On the basis of these comparisons, we expect the word svāhāsomewhere in
the part that I have not been able to decipher. In any case, it is clear that we have
here a variation on dhāran ̣īmaterial of the type seen in the Ekādaśamukha and
Figure 6. The foil recovered from the “Cirebon ”shipwreck, obverse and
reverse. Photo Horst Liebner, with tracing of the aks ̣aras by the author.
66 The text was originally edited by N. Dutt 1939 :3 5 –40. I cite the text with emendations
proposed by Somadeva Vasudeva in an unpublished edition that he kindly allowed me to
use.158 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 25] ---
theSādhanam ālā. The palaeographic appearance of the script is consistent with
a date in the ninth or tenth century.
5. Gold and silver foils from Candi Plaosan Lor, Central Java
In his Prasasti Indonesia II (1956: 170 –2), J.G. de Casparis included as item no.
V the edition of a “plate of gold leaf ”which had been discovered during exca-
vations at Candi Plaosan Lor in 1947. The discovery itself had been the subject
of a brief discussion in OV1948 (p. 30), where it was also mentioned that a little
silver plate had been found near the plate of gold foil, bearing the same inscrip-
tion. It seems to be this silver foil inscription that is captured on the photograph
OD 17094. Unfortunately, the current whereabouts of neither of the two foil
inscriptions appears to be known, and no archaeological photograph seems to
have been taken of the gold foil inscription at the time of its discovery.67
From their archaeological context, the inscriptions, written in Kawi script,
may be assigned to the ninth century. The published reading is as follows:
(1)om ̇namo buddh āya namo dharm āya namah ̣sam ̇ghāya tadyath āśuddhe
viśuddhe śodhani vi śodhani gaganavi śodhani cittavi śodhani p ā(2)<pā>-
varan ̣aviśodhani karm āvaran ̣aviśodhani vi śuddhe vi śuddhe ks ̣īn ̣e sarva-
ks ̣īn ̣e pus ̣pe supus ̣pe rajoharan ̣es a r v a p āpa(3)viśodhani hare hare sarv āvar-
anān ̣i daha daha sarvakarm āvaran ̣āni paca paca sarvasth ānagat āni padme
padm āks ̣i padmavi śā(4)le pha pha pha pha pha sv āhā
De Casparis indicated no substantial difficulty in reading the text of t he gold foil, and
there is no reason to doubt that his decipherment is correct. Indeed, seve ral elements
of this reading can also be recognized on the OD 17094 photo of a silver foil inscrip-
tion. De Casparis correctly identified this text as a dhāran ̣ī, and he translated:
Om ̇! Homage to the Buddha, Homage to the Dharma, Homage to the
Sam ̇gha. Thus (is the text): –Thou who art pure, perfectly pure, a purifier,
a perfect purifier, a purifier of the atmosphere, a purifier of the mind, a
purifier from the obstructions of Karman –thou, perfectly pure, perfectly
pure, lean, perfectly lean, flowerlike, perfectly flowerlike, a remover of
passion, a purifier from all evil –take away, take away all obstructions;
burn, burn all obstructions of Karman; consume, consume (the impurities)
67 OV1948, p. 30: “During the course of these investigations an excavation was carried out
in 1947 between the st ūpas II 21 and 22 of the inner circuit north of the main shrines.
This led to the discovery of a gold foil, 22 mm wide and 202 mm long, folded in nine
parts and containing a Sanskrit inscription in Old-Javanese characters. [ ...] A silver
foil with the same inscription and remnants of similar inscriptions on silver foil were
found in between other st ūpas near the place where the gold foil was discovered ”. See
also p. 23 of the same OV(dealing with a period marked by hostilities between forces
of the Republic of Indonesia and the Dutch colonialist aggressor): “As a consequence
of the rise in the price of gold during wartime (because gold was considered as the
most secure investment), there were almost no reports of gold finds. This was counter-
acted to some extent during the republican period by purchasing against black market
prices those objects that revealed themselves as being of archaeological value. ”WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 159

--- [Page 26] ---
gone into all the organs (?) –thou who art a Lotus, lotus-eyed, powerful in
the lotus. Pha pha pha pha pha Sv āhā.68
This scholar was unable to identify a precise scriptural source for the dhāran ̣ī,
but noted its affinity with the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanadh āran ̣ī. He knew the
latter only from two manuscripts kept at the Bibliothèque nationale at Paris,
and from the manner that he cites them it seems that he was not aware of the
further contents of these manuscripts.69The scriptural source for this dhāran ̣ī
is the eponymous Tantra, from which I cite (Skorupski 1983 : 127 –8):
om ̇namo bhagavate sarvadurgatipari śodhanar ājāya tath āgatāyārhate sam-
yaksam ̇buddh āya | tadyath ā|o m ̇śodhane śodhane sarvap āpaviśodhani
śuddhe vi śuddhe sarvakarm āvaran ̣aviśodhani sv āhā|
This mantra was very widespread in Buddhist Asia, and existed in many var-
iants. A version with only slightly different readings is one of two dhāran ̣īs
included in Taish ō1395 Baji kunan tuoluoni jing 拔濟苦難陀羅尼經“Sūtra
of the Dh āran ̣īfor Salvation from Tribulations ”(21: 912c), a short
dhāran ̣ī-sūtraabout which Rolf Giebel ( 1993 ) has published an article, where
he cited all the versions he had managed to identify at the time (see p. 152
for the Taish ōversion). Now the Javanese dhāran ̣īseems to comprise a combin-
ation, not known to me at this time from any other Buddhist tradition, of the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanadh āran ̣īwith another known dhāran ̣ī, pointed out to
me by Rolf Giebel.70It appears in another short dhāran ̣ī-sūtra, translated by
Faxian in 1001: Taish ō1399 Miechu wu nizui da tuoluoni jing 滅除五逆罪
大陀羅尼經“Sūtra of the Great Dh āran ̣īfor Extinguishing the Five Heinous
Sins ”(pañc ānantary ān ̣i)”(21: 915c –916a):
namo ratnatray āya nama āryāvalokite śvarāya bodhisattv āya mah āsattvāya
mahākārun ̣ikāya tadyath āom ̇śuddhe vi śuddhe suvi śuddhe ks ̣īn ̣e
pariks ̣īn ̣e pus ̣pe supus ̣pe jaloharan ̣e hara hara sarv āvaran ̣āni paca paca
sarvāpāyasth ānāni padme padm āks ̣i padmavi śāle phale pha pha pha ha
ha ha ha ha ajñ āle ajñ āle siddhajale sv āhā.
As Giebel points out to me, in this Chinese version ajñāleis uncertain, and jalo-
haran ̣eis probably an error for rajoharan ̣e, as we read on the foils from Candi
Plaosan. Although a precise scriptural source for the Javanese dhāran ̣īmay of
course still be discovered, it seems adequate to say that it is built substantially
on the same text as seen in Taish ō1399, with insertion of elements that are
all known from the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanadh āran ̣ī, except the epithets
68 De Casparis forgets to translate pāpāvaran ̣aviśodhani :“purifier from the obstructions of
evil”.
69 The manuscripts have the call numbers “Sanscrit 59 ”and “Sanscrit 62, no. 25 ”. The first
is a ms. of the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra , the second is part of a compilation of
dhāran ̣īs,stotra s and other types of texts. See the catalogue compiled by Jean
Filliozat ( 1941 : 29, and 31, 36).
70 Emails of 5 and 7 July 2012.160 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 27] ---
gaganavi śodhani71and cittavi śodhani .72It has been reported that the same
dhāran ̣īhas also been found engraved on silver and gold foils from Candi
Sojiwan, which have not, to my knowledge, ever been published, but which
were mentioned by Boechari ( 1976 :1 9 = 2012 : 172, n. 21).
Subsequent restoration work at the site of Candi Plaosan Lor in 1993 has
brought to light other gold, silver and bronze artefacts bearing Buddhist inscrip-
tions of a similar type, but now in Siddham ātr ̥kāscript closely resembling that of
the Kalasan, Kelurak, Plaosan and Ratu Baka stone inscriptions, so datable to
the period between the late eighth and mid-ninth centuries.73A provisional read-
ing of two gold foils, without diacritics, was included in the report on these
restorations (Gutomo and Niken Wirasanti 1998 : 54 with photo no. 27 on
p. 100) and later reproduced verbatim in Miksic et al. 2001 : 323 –4. Besides
an evident ye dharm āh ̣formula at the head of the second inscription cited by
Miksic et al., it is hard to make any sense of these two inscriptions in this pro-
visional reading. However, the Bureau of Conservation of Archaeological
Remains (BPPP) for Central Java province obligingly assented in August
2012 to my request to put photographs of these artefacts at my disposal.
Besides the two gold foils, the photos I received from the BPPP also included
a third item, that appeared to be in silver, and of which I found no mention
in the report by Gutomo and Niken Wirasanti, or the publication by Miksic
et al. This third photograph showed an inscription in two long lines of
Siddham ātr ̥kāscript identical to that on the two gold foils, but the photograph
was not sufficiently focused for me to be able to read the whole. I was subse-
quently allowed to come and inspect the three foils and photograph them
myself.74On this basis, I am now able to publish the following readings and
source identifications.
The taller gold foil was found in association with the reliquary in the SE cor-
ner below the floor level of the central chamber of the northern main temple at
Candi Plaosan Lor.75It measures 5.2 –5.8 × 25.5 cm, weighing 7.9 g ( Figure 7 ).
(1) [siddham] namo bhagavate śākkyamun ̣aye76tathāgatāyarhate77
samyak·samvuddh āya tadyath ā°om ̐vodhi vodhi vodhi satvetath āgata(2)
gocare78| dhara dhara hara hara prahara prahara mah āvodhicittadhare |
71 This epithet is known to me only from the first dhāran ̣īof the Mah āpratisar āmahāvidyārājñī.
See Hidas ( 2012 : 115) and Cruijsen et al. (forthcoming). Most witnesses read
gaganavi śodhane .
72 This epithet is not known to me from any other dhāran ̣ī.
73 See De Casparis ( 1956 : 176 –7), on the palaeography of the Plaosan stone inscription.
The aks ̣ara bha is almost indistinguishable from hain the script that we are dealing
with. This explains the excessive number of bhs in the published readings by Kusen.
74 I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to Dra. Zaimul Azzah, M. Hum., who was
at the time the acting head of BPPP Jawa Tengah, as well as her team, for their kind
assistance.
75 At the back of his 1995 monograph, Soekmono added to his brief note on these finds some
photos showing the context of discovery ( 1995 :1 2 1 –2, with plates 7 –8), and these help to
gain an impression of the condition in which these inscriptions were discovered.
76 śākkyamun ̣aye: read śākyamunaye .
77 tathāgatāyarhate : correct tathāgatāyārhate .
78 satvetath āgata°: correct sarvatath āgata° .WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 161

--- [Page 28] ---
Figure 7. Gold foil recovered from the North shrine at Candi Plaosan Lor. Photo Arlo Griffiths.162 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 29] ---
culu culu śatasahasrarasmisañcodite79(3)sarvvatath āgatabh ās ̣ite | gun ̣āgun ̣a-
vati80| vuddhagun ̣ā°avabh ās(e)81mili mili gagamatalapratis ̣t ̣ite82(4)sarvva-
tathāgatath āgatādhis ̣t ̣ite83| mabhastale84| sama sama prasama prasama85
sarvvap āpaśaman ̣e86| sarvvap āpe(5)viśodhani87| hulu hulu | vodhim ā-
rgasamprasthite sarvvatath āgatapratis ̣t ̣hiteśuddhe śuddhe sv āhā||(6)°om ̐
sarvvatath āgatavyalokite88jaya jaya sv āhā|| °om ̐huru huru jayamukhe
svāhā|| : || [fleurons]
This inscription gives the text of the Bodhigarbh ālam ̇kāralaks ̣adhāran ̣ī, a text
which has drawn quite a bit of attention in Buddhist studies in the last three dec-
ades, and which was thus far not known to be attested in Indonesia. I refer for
the most recent publication on this dhāran ̣īto Strauch 2009 . Admitting the
emendations proposed above, the version from Candi Plaosan Lor may be trans-
lated as follows:
Homage to the Lord Śākyamuni, the Tath āgata, the Arhant who is com-
pletely awakened. [The dhāran ̣īis] like this: O M. Awaken awaken awaken,
you (female deity of this dhāran ̣ī) who belong to the domain of all
Tathāgatas! Hold hold! Take take! Steal steal, you who hold the thought
of great awakening! C ULU CULU , you who are impelled by a hundred thou-
sand rays, who have been uttered by all Tath āgatas!89O virtue, O you who
possess virtue! You who possess the light of the virtues of a Buddha! M ILI
MILI, you who are established on the vault of the sky, you who are gov-
erned by all Tath āgatas, you sky-surface! Calm, calm! Appease, appease,
you who appease all evil, you who purify all evil! H ULU HULU ,y o uw h o
have set out on the path to great awakening, you who are established by
all Tath āgatas, pure one, pure one, SVĀHĀ!O M. You who are observed
by all Tath āgatas, win, win, SVĀHĀ!O M.H URU HURU , you who are the
face of victory, SVĀHĀ!
The reason why this dhāran ̣īwas deposited in the foundations of the monument
is very clear from the framing Sanskrit text in which it is embedded in several
other versions from India and Tibet. Let me quote here only Schopen ’s transla-
tion of the relevant passage ( 1989a [2005 ]: 329):
79 ° rasmi °: read ° raśmi°.
80 gun ̣āgun ̣avati : correct gun ̣a gun ̣avati .
81 vuddhagun ̣ā°avabh ās(e): emend vuddhagun ̣āvabh āse.
82 gagamatalapratis ̣t ̣ite: correct gaganatalapratis ̣t ̣hite°. For another error involving ma
instead of na, see n. 84 below.
83 sarvvatath āgatath āgatādhis ̣t ̣ite: correct sarvatath āgatādhis ̣t ̣hite.
84 mabhastale : correct nabhastale .
85 sama sama prasama prasama : read śama śama pra śama pra śama.
86 sarvvap āpaśaman ̣e: read sarvap āpa[pra] śamane .
87 sarvvap āpe vi śodhani : correct sarvvap āpavi śodhani .
88 ° vyalokite : correct ° vyavalokite .
89 Since culu can mean “a handful of water ”in Sanskrit, the reading sarvatath āgatābhis ̣ikte
“you who have been anointed by all Tath āgatas ”, seen in other versions (Strauch 2009 :
45) is more likely to be original.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 163

--- [Page 30] ---
Whatsoever monk or nun or lay man or woman, or whatsoever other
devout son or daughter of good family, after having written this
Dhāran ̣ī, after having deposited it inside, will make a caitya [shrine,
AG], by that single caitya being made[,] a hundred thousand caitya so f
the Tath āgata are (in effect) made. And those caitya s come to be wor-
shipped with articles (of worship), with all perfumes and flowers and
incense, aromatic powders, cloths, umbrellas, flags and banners. But it
is not merely the caitya (that is worshipped) thus: the Jewel of the
Buddha, the Jewel of the Dharma, and the Jewel of the Community are
(in effect) also worshipped with articles of such kind.
Another rolled piece of gold foil was found west of the SE reliquary. It measures
39 × 3.7 –4.0 cm, weighing 15.2 g. Its reading is as follows ( Figure 8 ):
(1)[siddham] ye dharmm āhetuprabhav āhetun tes ̣ānt a t h āgato hy avadat
tes ̣ām ̇ca yo nirodha °evamv ādīmahāśraman ̣ah ̣|| namah ̣saptānām ̇(2)
samyaksam ̇vuddhakot ̣īnām ̇tadyath ācala cula90cunde sv āhā|| namo
bhagavate ratna śikhine tath āgatāyārhate samyaksam ̇vuddh āya(3)tadyath ā
°om ̇ratna ratna ratnasam ̇bhave sv āhā|| namo bhagavate mañju śriye kum āra
kumāra(bh ū)tāya91tadyath āamala amala amalame (4)trāya92svā(hā)
We have here the ye dharm āh ̣formula, followed by a dhāran ̣īcalled the Saptasa-
ptatisamyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣ibhirukt ā“Proclaimed by seventy-seven crores of com-
pletely awakened ones ”, and two further dhāran ̣īs of which the first is attested in
transliteration in the Chinese canon (Taish ō1383, 21: 904b),93while the last remains
unidentified. As for the Saptasaptatisamyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣ibhirukt ā, I take this title
from the single South Asian Sanskrit text where I have found the dhāran ̣īin this full
form: it stands at the start of section 2.7 of the Kāran ̣d ̣avyūhasūtra, in the most
Figure 8. Gold foil recovered from the North shrine at Candi Plaosan Lor. Photo
Arlo Griffiths.
90 cala cula : correct cale cule .
91 kumāra kum āra(bh ū)tāya: correct kumārabh ūtāya. The bhūis not readable as such, but
restored here on the basis of the requirements of context.
92 amalametr āya: read amalamaitr āya?
93 Sumingzhi tuoluoni jing 宿命智陀羅尼經(“Sūtra of the Dh āran ̣īof Knowledge of
Former Lives ”), a short text translated by Faxian in 996. The text there reads, a bit
more extensively (but lacking bhagavate ):namo ratna śikhine tath āgatāya arhate sam-
yaksam ̇buddh āya, tad yath āom ̇ratne ratne suratne ratnodbhave mah āratnakiran ̣e rat-
nasam ̇bhave sv āhā. I owe this information to Rolf Giebel.164 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 31] ---
commonly used edition, straight after the section where the Buddha ’s pupil has been
taught the famous six-syllabled formula om ̇man ̣i padme h ūm ̇(Vaidya 1961 : 301):
atha bhagav ānśākyamunis tath āgato ’rhan samyaksam ̇buddhas tam etad
avocat: labdhal ābhas tvam ̇kulaputra? sa āha: yath ābhagav ānj ñānam ̇
sam ̇jānīte | tatah ̣saptasaptatih ̣samyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣ayah ̣sam ̇nipatit āh ̣|
taiścāpi tath āgatair iyam ̇dhāran ̣ībhās ̣itum ārabdh ānamah ̣saptānām ̇sam-
yaksam ̇buddhakot ̣īnām || om cale cule cunde94svāhā|| iyam ̇saptasaptati-
samyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣ibhirukt ā95nāma dh āran ̣ī||
I have made only the most evidently necessary emendations, in consultation of the
facsimile edition of a Nepalese manuscript published by Lokesh Chandra ( 1981 ),96
but even then, it is hard to escape the impression that the passage is incoherent, and
therefore probably corrupt. The following translation makes this clear:
Then the Lord Śākyamuni, the Tath āgata, the fully awakened Arhant spoke
this to him: “Have you obtained benefit, son of good family? ”He
answered: “Just as the Lord has perfect knowledge ”. Thereupon seventy-
seven crores of completely awakened ones flocked together, and those
Tathāgatas started to pronounce this dhāran ̣ī:“Homage to the seven crores
of completely awakened ones. O M.CALE CULE , O Cund āSVĀHĀ!”This is
thedhāran ̣īcalled Saptasaptatisamyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣ibhirukt ā.
The passage is not only hard to understand by itself, but also seems to lack
coherence with its context in the text as edited from Nepalese manuscripts.
Moreover, it is unattested in the significantly older Gilgit manuscript, and this
absence does not seem to be an accident that can be attributed to the very frag-
mentary condition of this witness (see Mette 1997 : 122 –3). One may therefore
suspect that the passage is an interpolation in the Nepalese tradition of this
text, but if this suspicion is justified, it begs the question from which source
the passage might have been borrowed. Beyond noting that a variant dhāran ̣ī
namah ̣reading saptānām ̇samyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣īnām ̇, namah ̣cale cunde
namah ̣is attested in Taish ō1169 (20:678c); that another variant namah ̣
saptānām ̇samyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣inām ̇[sic], om ̇cale cule cunde is attested in
the same text (20:686b); that the Javanese version of the dhāran ̣īis found in pre-
cisely the same form among the Sanskrit texts brought to Japan by K ūkai in the
early eighth century; and that this same collection of texts also includes a
Cund āstotra which alludes to the same idea of the dhāran ̣ībeing uttered by
94 cunde em.; cunye ed.
95 ° kot ̣ibhirukt āem.; ° kot ̣ibhirukk āed.
96 This is the codex denoted by siglum N1 in Mette ’s1997 edition. I give the corresponding
passage in diplomatic transliteration: [152:4] °atha bhagav ān·śākyamun ̣is tath āgato ’rhan
samyaksam ̇buddhas tam etad avocat· || labdhal ābhāst v a m ̇kulaputra || °evam ̇yathābhaga-
van· jñ ānam ̇sañjānīte || [5] tatah ̣saptasaptatih ̣samyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣īsannipatit āh ̣|| te c āpi
tathāgatā°imām ̇dhāran ̣ībhās ̣itum ārabdh āh ̣|| namah ̣saptānām ̇buddhakot ̣īnām ̇|| tadyath ā
[153:1] °om ̐cale cule cunde sv āhā|| °iyam ̇saptasaptatisamyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣ībhirukt ā
nāma dh āran ̣ī||.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 165

--- [Page 32] ---
seven (instead of seventy-seven) crores of Buddhas,97I must leave these textual
problems open here, and return to the inscription that was my starting point. In
the case of this apparently composite second inscription, the reason for its
deposit is unfortunately not provided by the identification of the source texts.
Nothing seems be known with certainty about the exact provenance of the
third foil, mentioned above, but we may safely assume that it too was found
during the restoration process of the same monument. Its dimensions are
56.5 × 3.6 cm, its weight 15.2 g. I read as follows ( Figure 9 ):
(1)[ye dharmm ā] hetuprabhav āhetun tes ̣ānt a t h āgato hy avadat· tes ̣ām ̇
ca yo nirodha °evamv ādīmahāśraman ̣ah ̣|| namah ̣saptānām ̇
samyaksamvuddhakot ̣īnām ̇tadyath ācale cule cunde sv āhā|| namo (2)
[ta](th āga)tāyārhate samyaksa(m ̇)vuddh āya tadyath ā°aks ̣a298°aks ̣a-
yapun ̣yajñānasam ̇bhāropacite sv āhā|| namo bhagavate ratna śikhine tath ā-
gatāyārhate samyaksam ̇vuddh āya(3)[ra](tnameya)ratnasambhave sv āhā
Here again we find the ye dharm āh ̣formula followed by the Sapta-
saptatisamyaksam ̇buddhakot ̣ibhirukt ā. Then follows a variant of the
mantra that, as we have seen above, forms part of the expanded recension
of the dhāran ̣īof the Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtra:tadyath āom ̐pun ̣yamah āpun ̣ya apari-
mitāpun ̣ya aparimit āyupun ̣ya jñ ānasambh āropacite . I am unable to trace this
variant with aks ̣aa k s ̣aa k s ̣aya° in any other text. Then follow the words namo
bhagavate ratna śikhine tath āgatāyārhate samyaksam ̇vuddh āyawhich we saw
previously on the second gold foil, but it is possible that they occur here with a
termination that is slightly different from that we saw there ( tadyath āom ̇ratna
ratna ratnasam ̇bhave sv āhā). The silver foil is unfortunately damaged at the
point of possible difference. As noted above (n. 93), a variant of this dhāran ̣ī
addressed to the Buddha Ratna śikhin is attested in the Chinese canon.
6. Two man ̣d ̣alastakes ( kīla) from Central Java
A recent publication from the Bureau of Conservation of Archaeological Remains
(BPPP) of the special region of Yogyakarta includes, among numerous other items
97 T. 1169 ( Chimingzang yuqie dajiao Zunna pusa daming chengjiu yigui jing 持明藏瑜伽
大敎尊那菩薩大明成就儀軌經,“Sūtra of ritual rules for the accomplishment of the
great spell of the Bodhisattva Cund ā, a great yoga teaching from the
Vidy ādharapit ̣aka”) is a manual for rituals associated with Cund āthat was translated
by Faxian in 994. I once again owe the Taish ōreferences to Rolf Giebel, who has
also pointed out to me that in the Qijuzhi fomu suoshuo Zhunti tuoluoni jing 七倶胝
佛母所説准提陀羅尼經(T. 1076, “Sūtra of Cund ā’sdhāran ̣īspoken by the
Buddha-mother of seven crores ”), a ritual manual for Cund ātranslated by
Amoghavajra, it is specifically stated that this dhāran ̣īwas “spoken by seven crores of
Buddhas of the past ”(20:178c). Regarding the Sanskrit texts preserved in Japan,
I refer to Giebel 2012 : 201 –6, and to Sakai 1991 . See on Cund āin East Asia also
Gimello 2004 .
98 The occurrence of the numeral sign 2to indicate repetition of aks ̣afurnishes a relatively
early instance of this mode of notation, which is not yet encountered e.g. in the Gilgit
mss. of the Mah āpratisar āmah āvidyārājñī(Hidas 2012 : 46). See also Cruijsen et al.,
forthcoming, n. 176.166 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 33] ---
of interest, an inscribed object in tuff stone, resembling in shape some of the
numerous inscribed boundary marking stones whose inscriptions form a distinct
category of Javanese epigraphy.99The object is stated to have been found in
1975, but this cannot be correct. The very fact that an excellent set of photograp hs
is preserved at Leiden University proves that the discovery must have take n place
earlier, because photographs stopped being supplied to Leiden by 1959.
According to the Leiden website (see n. 49), the creation of the prints of these
Figure 9. (Colour online) Silver foil recovered from the North shrine at Candi
Plaosan Lor. Photos Arlo Griffiths.
99 See Herni Pramastuti et al. 2007 :5 6–7. On inscribed stone boundary markers ( vatu s īma)
from Java, see Titi Surti Nastiti forthcoming.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 167

--- [Page 34] ---
OD photos 21151 –21160 kept in Leiden dates to 1958. The provenance there
cited is Kali Tirto, Berbah, Sleman; this disagrees slightly with the inform ation
in the recent publication, which states Jragung, Berbah, Sleman.100The stone is
currently held at the site museum in the Prambanan complex (Taman Wisa ta
Figure 10. Photo OD 21151. Courtesy of Leiden University Library.
100 This means that we can be relatively sure that the provenance was in kecamatan Berbah
ofkabupaten Sleman in the province DIY, but uncertainty remains about the lower
administrative divisions. According to current divisions, Jragung is a dusun in the
desa Jogotirto; there is still, today, a desa Kalitirto, but it lies on the opposite bank
of the Kali Opak. I do not have access to an old map that would allow me to determine
whether Jragung fell administratively within the desa Kalitirto in the 1950s, but this
seems a priori unlikely. If there is an error in either the Leiden database or the recent
publication, I am unable to determine on which side the error lies.168 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 35] ---
Candi Prambanan) and bears the inventory number BG 37. One of the OD photos
is reproduced here as Figure 10 .T h es h a p eo ft h e aks ̣aras points to a date in the
ninth or tenth century. The published reading, virtually without diacritical ma rks,
bears only a vague resemblance to the text that is actually engraved, which I read
as follows:
(1) | °o(m ̐) vajr( ā)nala hana daha pa(ca) ma(tha) bhañja ran ̣ahūm ̐(phat ̣·)
vajra[n]e[tri bandha]101(2)sarvvavighn ān· sv āhā, °om ̐hulu hulu h ūm ̐
phat ̣·, °om ̐drum ̇vandha ham ̐h(vana)h ̣(3)bajrap āśe hum ̐,102°om ̐vajra-
yaks ̣ahūm ̐,° o m ̐vajraśi(kha)re rut ̣·( m a t ̣·),(4)(h)ū(m ̐) vajra(ka)rmma h ūm ̐
°om ̐bajrak īla kīlaya h ūm ̇phat ̣·, hum ̇hum ̇hum ̇hum ̇hum ̇hum ̇hum ̇(5)
hum ̇hum ̇hum ̇,° o m ̇gha gha gh ātaya gh ātaya sarvvadus ̣t ̣ān· phat ̣·kīlaya(6)
kīlaya sarvvap āpān· phat ̣·, hum ̇hum ̇hum ̇bajrak īla bajradha (7)(ro) jñ ā-
payati,103sarvvadus ̣t ̣ān· kāyavāk·cittam· (va)jra (8)m· kīlaya h ūm ̇phat ̣·, //
I have presented the text in two paragraphs, for it appears that it is composed
of two parts, identifiable in distinct Sanskrit texts preserved in manuscripts
from Nepal. The first paragraph finds a remarkable parallel in the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra . In the context of the ritual eradication by the
tantric adept ( yogin ) of obstructions to his practice, we read a section intermin-
gling ritual instruction with virtually the same mantra s that we find on the stone.
This section must be quoted here in full along with the editor ’s translation
(Skorupski 1983 : 134 –6; trans.: 12 –3).104The mantra s corresponding to those
in the first paragraph of our inscription are indicated in bold type:
tato vajr ānalena mudr āsahitena vighnadahan ādikam ̇kuryāt|om ̇vajr ānala
hana daha paca matha bhañja ran ̣ahūm ̇phat ̣ity ud īrayet | abhyanta-
ravajrabandhe ’n ̇gulijv ālāgarbhe ’n ̇gus ̣t ̣havajram utthitam iyam ̇vajrānalamudr ā|
tad anu | vajranetri bandha sarvavighn āniti | mudr āyukty āsarvavighna-
bandham ̇kuryāt | vajrabandham ̇baddhv ān ̇gus ̣t ̣hadvayam ̇prasārya sa-
mam ̇dhārayet | vajranetr īmudr ā105|p r a s āritavajrabandham ̇bhūmyām ̇
pratis ̣t ̣hāpyādhobandham ̇kuryāt|o m ̇vajra dr ̥d ̣ho me bhava raks ̣a sarv ān
svāhā| vajrabhairavanetren ̣a mudr āsahitenordhvabandham ̇kuryāt|om ̇hulu
101 Only vajraCe is legible. The lost syllables can safely be restored on the basis of the
textual parallels presented below.
102 One might perhaps expect hrīh ̣vajrap āśehūm ̐since the parallel adduced below has
hūm ̇vajrap āśeh r īh ̣. Indeed, the presence of the syllable natentatively read here is
very doubtful, and it might at least be possible to read hrah ̣at the start of the sequence.
If ever there was an ī-vocalization, no trace remains visible on the OD photos.
103 bajradha(ro) jñ āpayati : damage to the stone prevents absolute certainty as to the
intended reading, but it seems unlikely that the expected preverb ā(cf. ājñāpayati in
the parallel texts identified below) was actually written.
104 I have emended Skorupski ’shum ̇tohūm ̇throughout. This section is taken over nearly
verbatim in the eleventh-century ritual manual entitled Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā, chapter 6
(Devat āyoga ). See Inui ( 1988 : 103 –101 = 1991: 176 –174). See also below on the like-
lihood that this Devat āyoga section has been adapted from an older text, the
Sarvavajrodaya .
105 vajranetr īmudr āem.; vajranetrimudr āed.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 169

--- [Page 36] ---
hulu h ūm ̇phat ̣|i t i|v a j r a m u s ̣t ̣idvayam ̇baddhv ālātacakram ̇bhrāmayitv āśira-
sopari tarjanyan ̇kuśākāren ̣ad h ārayet | vajrabhairavanetramudr ā| tasy ā-
dhast ād vajrayaks ̣en ̣a mudr āsahitena punar bandham ̇kuryāt|om ̇vajra-
yaks ̣ahūm ̇iti | vajr āñjaler an ̇gus ̣t ̣hadvayam ̇prasāritam ̇tarjan īdvayam ̇
dam ̣s ̣t ̣rā| vajrayaks ̣amudr ā| vajros ̣n ̣īs ̣en ̣a mudr āyuktena p ūrvām ̇diśam ̇
bandhayet | om ̇drum ̇bandha ham ̇iti | drum ̇iti vā| vajramus ̣t ̣idvayam ̇
kanyas āśr ̥n ̇khalābandhena tarjan īdvayas ūcīmukham ̇parivartos ̣n ̣īs ̣es t h ā-
payet | vajros ̣n ̣īs ̣amudr ā| punar vajrap āśena t ām eva bandhayet | hūm ̇
vajrap āśeh r īh ̣iti | vajramus ̣t ̣idvayena b āhugranthim ̇kuryāt | vajrap āśā-
mudr ā106| vajrapat ākayāpaścimām ̇diśam ̇bandhet | om ̇vajrapat āke
patam ̇gini rat ̣eti | vajrabandhe ’n ̇gus ̣t ̣hasattvaparyan ̇kasūcīm ̇kr ̥tvāgrāsamā-
nāmāvidāritāntyapat ̣āgrī| vajrapat ākāyāh ̣| digvidiks ̣v adha ūrdhvañ ca vi-
ghnanikr ̥ntanam ̇kuryāt | vajrak ālyottar ām ̇diśam ̇bandhet | hr īh ̣vajrak āli
rut ̣mat ̣| iti | vajrayaks ̣amudr ām eva mukhe dr ̥d ̣hīkr ̥tya vajrak ālyāh ̣| vajra-
śikharay ādaks ̣in ̣ām ̇diśam ̇bandhet | om ̇vajra śikhare rut ̣mat ̣| iti | vajra-
mus ̣t ̣idvayena parvatotkars ̣an ̣ābhinay ākāram ̇vajraśikhar āyāh ̣| vajrakarman ̣ā
man ̣d ̣alabandham ̇kr ̥tvāprākāram ̇dady āt|hūm ̇vajrakarme ti | punar
abhyantarapr ākāram ̇vajrah ūm ̇kāren ̣ahūm ̇iti | vajramus ̣t ̣idvayam ̇baddhv ā
bāhuvajram ̇samādhāya kanis ̣t ̣hān ̇kuśabandhit ātrilokavijayan āmatarjan ī-
dvayam ̇tarjan ī| vajrah ūm ̇kārasya | iyam eva madhy āgradvayam ̇vajram ̇
vajrakarman ̣ah ̣
Next he should burn the obstruction by applying the gesture of Vajr ānala.
He should exclaim: O M ̇VAJRĀNALA KILL,BLAZE ,CONSUME ,CONVULSE ,BREAK ,
BATTLE H ŪM ̇PHAT ̣. The gesture of Vajr ānala is the vajra -thumb raised in the
middle of blazing fingers comprised inside the vajra- bond.
Next he says: O M ̇VAJRANETR ĪBIND ALL THE OBSTRUCTIONS . He applies the
gesture and binds all the obstructions. He makes the vajra- bond, stretches
the thumbs and holds them evenly. This is the gesture of Vajranetr ī.
Placing the outstretched vajra- bond on the ground he should bind beneath.
He says: O M ̇VAJRA BE FIRM FOR ME ,PROTECT ALL SV ĀHĀ.
Applying the gesture of Vajrabhairavanetra he should bind above. He
says: O M ̇HULU HULU H ŪM ̇PHAT ̣. Binding the vajra- fists and waving them
like a firebrand he should hold them above the head with the forefingers
made into hooks. This is the gesture of Vajrabhairavanetra.
Once more by means of the gesture of Vajrayaks ̣ahe should make a new
bond beneath, saying: O M ̇VAJRAYAKS ̣AHŪM ̇. The gesture of Vajrayaks ̣ais a
form of the vajra-añjali with the thumbs outstretched and the forefingers
projecting like tusks.
With the gesture of Vajros ̣n ̣īs ̣ahe should bind the eastern quarter. He says
either O M ̇DRUM ̇BIND HAM ̇or just DRUM ̇. He should place the vajra -fists on
the crown of his bowed head with the little fingers linked together like a
chain and the forefingers made into a point. This is the gesture of Vajros ̣n ̣īs ̣a.
Once more he should bind the same quarter by applying the gesture of
Vajrap āśa.He says: H UM ̇VAJRAP ĀŚAHRĪH ̣. He should make a knot with
106 vajrap āśāmudr āem.; vajrap āśamudr āed.170 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 37] ---
the arms by means of the vajra- fists.This is the gesture of Vajrap āśa.107
He should bind the western quarter by means of Vajrapat ākā.He says:
OM ̇,FLYING VAJRAPAT ĀKĀFLUTTER . The gesture of Vajrapat ākāis the vajra -
bond in which the thumbs are crossed. The forefingers are put together and
then parted, and the little fingers are made like banners.
He should destroy the obstruction below and above, in the quarters and in
the intermediate quarters.
He should bind the northern quarter by means of Vajrak ālī.He says: O M ̇
VAJRAK ĀLĪRUT ̣MAT ̣. The gesture of Vajrak ālīis the gesture of Vajrayaks ̣a
firmly placed at the heart.
With Vajra śikhar āhe should bind the southern quarter. He says: O M ̇
VAJRA ŚIKHAR ĀRUT ̣MAT ̣. The gesture of Vajra śikhar āis made with the
vajra- fists shaped like an arched hillock. He binds the man ̣d ̣alaby
means of the gesture of Vajrakarma. He makes thus the enclosing wall.
He says: H UM ̇VAJRAKARMA .
The inner enclosure is made by means of Vajrahum ̇kāra,saying: H UM ̇.H e
binds the vajra -fists and forms a vajra with his arms; the little fingers he
makes into hooks and raises the forefingers into a point known as
Trilokyavijaya (Victor over the Threefold World). This is the gesture of
Vajrahum ̇kāra.108
It should be pointed out that this portion is found only in what Skorupski ( 1983 :
xvii) has called “version B ”of the Tantra, and finds no correspondent in “ver-
sion A ”. Skorupski considered the Tibetan translation of “version A ”to be as old
as the eighth century, while the oldest evidence for the existence of “version B ”
would be a Tibetan translation from the thirteenth century. It is at first sight sur-
prising to see our ninth –tenth-century Javanese inscription agreeing with the
ostensibly “later ”version, but in his review of Skorupski ’s work, van der
Kuijp ( 1992 ) has pointed out that the very ancient date attached to “version
A”cannot be taken at face value, and that the transmission of this version is
not at all reliable; conversely, Skorupski has himself pointed out that the
parts of “version B ”not represented in “version A ”“certainly represent very
early materials ”(p. xxix). That the set of deities involved in this portion had
been received in Bali was already known from their occurrence in a
Buddhist hymn transmitted on that island in manuscripts.109None of these, how-
ever, is earlier than the seventeenth century, although the presence of the set
of deities must logically precede the oldest manuscript by some amount of
time. It seems to me that our inscription now offers fairly strong evidence of
the availability to Buddhist priests in ninth –tenth-century Java of a textual/
ritual tradition very closely related to that preserved in the thirteenth-century
Tibetan translation and still much later Nepalese manuscripts of the
107 The form vajrap āśemust be a vocative of the feminine Vajrap āśā, rather than
Skorupski ’s Vajrap āśa.
108 I have not adjusted the quotation of Skorupski ’s translation in the light of the small
emendations proposed in the text.
109 See Nihom ( 1994 : 78) and Goudriaan and Hooykaas ( 1971 : 525 –9, hymn 896).WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 171

--- [Page 38] ---
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra .110It would hence seem that we can confirm
with entirely independent evidence the conclusions reached earlier by Nihom,
using the Balinese manuscript material, “that a tradition reflecting the form
and content of [chapter 1 of “version B ”of this Tantra] was available at some
time in classical Indonesia ”.111I will return to this issue below.
The second paragraph of the inscription is itself composed of three parts.
The first runs from om ̇vajrak īlatophat ̣. Then we find tenfold repetition of
hum ̇(i.e. the bījaHŪM ̐). I will return to these first two parts below. The third
part comprises the remainder of the inscription. This last part is found almost
verbatim in a number of texts. I have found it in the ritual manuals
Pin ̣d ̣īkramas ādhana112and Sādhanam ālā,113but also in the scripture
Guhyasam ājatantra , at 14.59 (Matsunaga 1978 ):
atha bhagav ān sarvatath āgatak āyavākcittanibandhanavajram ̇nāma sam ā-
dhim ̇samāpadyedam ̇sarvatraidh ātukak āyavākcittak īlanavajram ̇svakāya-
vākcittavajrebhyo ni ścārayāmāsa | om ̇gha gha gh ātaya gh ātaya
sarvadus ̣t ̣ān phat ̣kīlaya k īlaya sarvap āpān phat ̣hūm ̇hūm ̇vajra
kīlaya vajradhara ājñāpayati k āyavākcittavajram ̇kīlaya h ūm ̇phat ̣|
Then the Lord entered the meditation called “Binding Vajra of the bodies,
speech and minds of all the Tath āgatas ”and brought forth from the Vajras
which are his own body, speech and mind this Vajra for pinning down the
body, speech and mind of all the [Tath āgatas of the] three realms: “OM ̇GHA
GHAstrike strike all ills PHAT ̣! Pin down, pin down all evils PHAT ̣!HŪM ̇HŪM ̇,
Vajra, pin down –the Vajra-master commands the Vajra which is body,
speech and mind –pin down HŪM ̇PHAT ̣!”.
However, in none of the mentioned texts is this mantra combined with om ̐
vajrak īla k īlaya h ūm ̐phat ̣. It is only in another ritual manual, the
Sarvavajrodaya composed by the ninth-century author Ānandagarbha (and the
later Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik āwhich seems to be based on it in this section),
that I find this combination. In the edition based on a single eleventh-century
110 The fact that the deities Vajrapat ākāand Vajrak ālīare part of the Balinese list suggests
that their omission from our inscription, that lists only eight mantra s in the first para-
graph, is not intentional.
111 Nihom ( 1994 : 80): “Consequently, on the basis of the existence of these selections of
Indo-Indonesian Sanskrit text fragments, it appears that a tradition reflecting the form
and content of this chapter 1 of SDP-B was available at some time in classical
Indonesia ”. And p. 82: “Although the Tibetan translation of SDP-B dates from the
thirteenth century and although all originally Indian commentaries on the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhana which have survived are on recension A, SDP-B chapter 1
must have existed several centuries earlier than the thirteenth century, most probably
before the composition of the Indian commentaries on SDP-A, the earliest of which
is perhaps that of Buddhaguhya, that is, from the second half of the eighth century. ”
112 De la Vallée Poussin ( 1896 : 2, verses 10 –13), plus the mantra between stanzas 13 and
14.
113 Bhattacharya 1968, nr. 267 Bhūtad ̣āmaras ādhana , p. 525.172 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 39] ---
Nepalese manuscript established by a group of young Japanese scholars, we read
as paragraph 37:114
tatah ̣khadiravajrak īlakāh ̣man ̣d ̣alakon ̣e catus ̣t ̣aye vajren ̣ākot ̣yāh ̣|
om ̇vajrak īla kīlaya sarvavighnam ̇bandha h ūm ̇phat ̣||
ity anena hr ̥dayen ās ̣t ̣ottara śatam ̇parijapya | v āmavajramus ̣t ̣yāvā
pañcas ūcikam ̇vajram ̇ādāya tena h ūm ̇kāram ud īrayan man ̣d ̣alakon ̣e
catus ̣t ̣aye man ̣d ̣alanābhau ca k īlakapañcakam ̇nis ̣pādya | daks ̣in ̣akaren ̣a
trisūcikavajr īkr ̥tenākot ̣ayed imam ud īrayan |
om ̇gha gha gh ātaya gh ātaya sarvadus ̣t ̣ān phat ̣||
kīlaya k īlaya sarvap āpān phat ̣||
vajrak īlavajradhara ājñāpayati sv āhā115|| iti ||
Then Vajra-stakes of khadira wood are to be driven into the four corners of
theman ̣d ̣alawith a Vajra. He mutters around them one hundred and eight
times with this heart- mantra :“OM ̇Vajra-stake, pin down all obstacles,
bind HŪM ̇PHAT ̣!”Or else he takes a five-pronged Vajra with the left
[hand held in the form of the] Vajra-fist, and while he utters the syllable
HŪM ̇should make the five stakes in the four corners of the man ̣d ̣alaand
in its centre with that [Vajra]; with his right hand made into [the shape
of] a three-pronged Vajra he should drive [them into the ground] while
uttering this [ mantra ]:“OM ̇GHA GHA strike strike all ills PHAT ̣! Pin down,
pin down all evils PHAT ̣! The Vajra-master of the Vajra-stake commands
[you], SVĀHĀ!116
Returning now to the first two parts of the second paragraph of our inscription,
I presume that the tenfold repetition of the bījaHŪM ̐, for which I do not find
a precise textual parallel, indicates destruction of obstacles in the ten
directions (the four cardinal and intermediate quarters of space, above and
114 The Sanskrit text of the Sarvavajrodaya is known to be preserved only in a single,
incomplete, manuscript dated 1059 CE. From this manuscript, the Sanskrit text was edi-
ted in two parts by a group of students (Mikky ōSeiten Kenky ūkai 1986 –87), with a
Japanese translation; a supplement was later published by Takahashi 1988 , who was
a member of the group. Little seems to have been published in English on this text,
its author and its date. On its date, see Tanemura ( 2004 : 8 n. 22). On the text, its
date and its author, see Sanderson ( 2009 : 125), who speaks of “the ninth-century
Indian authority Ānandagarbha ”and calls the text “an influential manual that sets out
detailed practical guidance for the performance of the initiation ritual taught ”in the
Sarvatath āgatatattvasam ̇graha , 236 n. 514 (justification for the dating). See also
Isaacson 2009 : 95 (the author is called a “celebrated authority on Yogatantra ”), 113.
For the parts of the Sarvavajrodaya not preserved in the single Sanskrit manuscript,
we can take recourse to its Tibetan translation (not accessible to me). I thank Ryugen
Tanemura for his great help in giving me access to the Sarvavajrodaya and interpreting
its pertinence to the Javanese inscriptions under discussion in this article.
115 The text of the Sarvavajrodaya as edited by the Japanese team here diverges from the
text seen in our inscription and in several other transmitted versions of this mantra .A s
the editors note, the manuscript is damaged at this place. Is it possible that more sylla-
bles were lost than their decision (based on the Tibetan translation) to terminate the
mantra with svāhāsuggests?
116 Cf. Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā6.3.9.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 173

--- [Page 40] ---
below);117it may be assumed that the Sarvavajrodaya ’s instruction hūm ̇kāram
udīrayan indicates a very similar liturgical element, although the number of the
stakes there seems to be only five. As for the first part, a slightly mo re exten-
sive variant of this occurs in another Javanese inscription of the ninth or
tenth century, engraved on a lin ̇ga-shaped stone whose precise provenance
is unknown, held in the National Museum at Jakarta, under number
D. 140.118This inscription was published first by Crucq ( 1929 : 274), and sub-
sequently drew attention again from other scholars, all misguided by the idea
that the language of the inscription was Old Javanese. However, some decades
later Boechari ( 1964 :1 2 3= 2012 : 66 n. 5) observed that the text is in Sanskrit
and must undoubtedly be read as follows:
vajrak īla kīlaya sarvvavighn ān vandha vandha h ūm ̇phat ̣om ̇
This is (with just two minor variants: the repetition of vandha and the displace-
ment of om ̇to the end) identical to the text of the kīlanahr ̥daya “heart- mantra for
placing a stake ”found first in the Sarvatath āgatatattvasam ̇graha , and hence
repeated in several later Buddhist tantric texts, including the Sarvavajrodaya
and the Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā, but not the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra .
The passage is as follows (Horiuchi 1983 /I, p. 526, sections 1264 –5):
man ̣d ̣alasya tu madhye vai viddhv ākhadirak īlakam |
tatas tu s ūtram ̇dvigun ̣am ̇kr ̥tvātena pras ūtrayet ||
tatredam ̇kīlakahr ̥dayam ̇bhavati:
om ̇vajrak īla kīlaya sarvavighn ān bandha h ūm ̇phat ̣||
He should pierce a stake of khadira wood into the centre of the man ̣d ̣ala.
Then he should make a cord of two threads and draw the lines with it. For
this purpose, there is the spell for placing the stake: “OM ̇. Vajra-stake, pin
down all obstacles, bind [them] HŪM ̇PHAT ̣!”
It is now time to draw conclusions from these data. With regard to
the textual correspondences between chapter 1 of “version B ”of the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra , on the one hand, and Balinese Buddhist liturgical
materials on the other, adduced by Nihom ( 1994 :7 8–80) in favour of his conclusion
that this Tantra was disseminated to the Indonesian archipelago, we have to keep in
mind that all of the same correspondences can be traced in the
Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā. This text, dating from the eleventh century, would be old
enough to have served as the source for the Balinese material, but is too late to
have served as source for the two inscriptio ns under discussion here. However, all
117 Cf. digvidiks ̣v adha ūrdhvañ ca vighnanikr ̥ntanam ̇kury ātin the long quotation from the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra given above. See Tanemura ( 2004 : 31 n. 70) on what
may have been meant by “above ”and “below ”in the case of a two-dimensional ground
plan.
118 See Notulen van de algemeene en directievergaderingen van het Bataviaasch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 54 (1916), pp. 45, 190. I have not seen
the stone myself, and take the information that it is shaped like a lin ̇gafrom the Notulen .174 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 41] ---
of the relevant textual material is found in the Devat āyoga part of the sixth chapter of
the text, and this is precisely the part which is considered to have been adapted from
the significantly older Sarvavajrodaya .119This last text, possibly composed in the
ninth century, would probably be old enough to have served as source for our inscrip-
tions.120Unfortunately, the part corresponding to Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā6Deva-
tāyoga is not preserved in the sole Sanskrit manuscript known to exist for this text.
Because I do not have access myself to the Tibetan version of the Sarvavajrodaya ,
I limit myself to pointing out the correspondences between the elements that drew
Nihom ’s attention in the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra and the corresponding
parts of the Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā(seeTable 1 ).
Among these elements, it must first be recalled that items 3 and 4 concern precisely
the passages of the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra (and Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā)
which I have cited as a possible source for the first paragraph of the first inscription.
If we may assume, then, that these and all the other elements, whose place in the
Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik āis indicated in the table, do indeed find their correspondent
in the (Tibetan version of the) Sarvavajrodaya , this means that the first paragraph
of our first inscription may have been quoted from that text rather than the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra . If we keep in mind, furthermore, that the Tibetan
version of the Sarvavajrodaya presumably offers parallels for all the segments of
this inscription, and that this text is the only one which does so while also being
old enough to have been known in (late) ninth-century Java, whereas the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra does not provide a source for all elements of the
first inscription, and does not offer anything corresponding to the part that is also
represented in the second inscription, it seems that we must draw the conclusion
that it is more likely that the Sarvavajrodaya (or a text closely related to it) than
that the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra inspired the rituals during which or with a
view to whose execution these inscriptions were produced.121
Although none of the ritual texts cited here prescribes the use of “stakes ”
(kīla) made of stone,122it nevertheless seems clear that these two stones served
as stakes –possibly the central ones –during the ritual opening of the ground
plan ( man ̣d ̣ala) of Buddhist shrines. In this connection, given the physical
resemblance of these stones to the rather numerous wholly or partly lin ̇ga-
shaped boundary markers preserved from Central Java, called “sīmastones ”
(vatu s īma) in contemporary inscriptions (cf. n. 99), it is significant that certain
Indian inscriptions use precisely the word kīlaka to denote cadastral boundary
markers.123Obviously, the spheres of a ritual demarcation of agricultural land
119 See Tanemura 2004 :8–9.
120 I assume that Sundberg ’s statement to the contrary ( 2003 : 172 n. 17) was based on
contradictory information about the date of the Sarvavajrodaya .
121 For the potential pertinence of the Sarvavajrodaya , I refer also to Table 2 in Ishii 1992 ,
which shows that of the Sanskrit stanzas in the Javanese San ̇Hyan ̇Kamah āyānan
Mantranaya , there is one that this author has been able to identify exclusively in the
Sarvavajrodaya .
122 I have intentionally chosen the word “stake ”to translate kīlahere, as our Javanese
inscriptions seem to imply a rather large object such as the word “stake ”denotes. In
other contexts, a word like “peg”might be a more suitable translation.
123 For an example of the use of kīlaka to denote a cadastral boundary marker in an Indian
inscription, see the seventh-century Panchrol (or Egra) copper-plate inscription of theWRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 175

--- [Page 42] ---
Table 1. Correspondences between Balinese Buddhist liturgy, Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra “version B ”and the Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā
Liturgical element found in Bali Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra
“version B ”(ed. Skorupski)Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā
(ed. Inui 1991 )
1 pūjāmegha mantra s 140: 14 –21 6.2.2.5 (p. 164)
2 “Anuttar āPūjā”hymn 146: 9 –25 6.2.2.7 (pp. 161 –160)
3 Divinities of the Balinese
Pañcada śavajradevat āstuti134: 19 –136: 26 6.2.1.6 (pp. 176 –174)
4 Vajra Fire mantra 134: 16 6.2.1.6 (p. 176)
5 Self-generation as divinity
Vajrajv ālānalārka
and subsequent meditative procedures132: 23 –27 6.2.1.2 –3 (pp. 178 –177)176 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 43] ---
and the ritual demarcation of man ̣d ̣alas were felt to be connected in ancient India
and Indonesia, as is expressed by the use in these spheres of a partly overlapping
set of terminological and material culture.
7. Inscriptions with the mantra t ̣aki h ūm ̇jah ̣
Another case where the Sarvavajrodaya could be pertinent to Javanese data is furn-
ished by a group of inscriptions containing mantra s with the sequence t ̣aki/īhūm ̇jah ̣.
In an important study published in 2003, Jeff Sundberg drew attention to and eluci-
dated a unique gold artefact excavated in the Ratu Baka complex near Prambanan,
bearing the text om ̇t ̣akīhūm ̇jah ̣svāhā. He has done his best to find a scriptural source
for this mantra . Unable to find a precise match, he pinned much of his argument on
the attestation of admittedly very similar, although not identical, mantra si nt h e
Sarvatath āgatatattvasam ̇graha .124However, om ̇t ̣akīhūm ̇jah ̣is attested as such
in the Guhyasam ājatantra (14.22), which Sundberg does not mention;125perhaps
more significantly, it is also found in the Sarvavajrodaya , whose ritual system is
based on that of the Sarvatath āgatatattvasam ̇graha .126
Sundberg has pointed out that there are a few other, similar and obviously
related stone inscriptions from Central Java, but in my opinion he was wrong
to maintain, with his predecessors, that these inscriptions read paki instead of
t ̣aki, on which basis he concluded that “their mantra is not that of
the Ratu Baka gold plate ”.127It is safe to assume that t ̣akiis intended through-
out,128and the evidence suggests that the formula t ̣aki h ūm ̇jah ̣at the beginning
of three of these four short stone inscriptions recording the erection of boundary
time of Śaśān ̇ka, from West Bengal (Furui 2011 : 124, 127); for another Indian example,
again from West Bengal, but from the sixth century, using kīlaka next to the term sīmā,
see the Mallas ārul copper-plate inscription of Vijayasena, ll. 14 –16 (Sircar 1965 : 375 –
6; Mukherjee and Maity 1967 : 89 and 93). I thank Ryosuke Furui for the reference to
the Mallas ārul inscription.
124 This is indeed probably the oldest source (or one of the oldest sources) for mantra s
using the element t ̣akki. We find in this text the following mantra s (section numbers
after Horiuchi ’s edition, which reads hum ̇forhūm ̇):hūm ̇t ̣akki jjah ̣(662), t ̣akki ah ̣,
t ̣akki jjah ̣,t ̣akki h ūm ̇(927), om ̇t ̣akki jjah ̣(1229). Note that this text everywhere
seems to give the bījas with kkandjj.
125 The absence of svāhācan be considered a trivial difference. Cf. other cases of variation
between mantra s involving the presence or absence of final svāhāpresented above,
n. 115.
126 See the list of mantra s occurring in the Sarvavajrodaya , compiled by Takahashi ( 1988 :
96–81) both from the parts preserved in Sanskrit and from those preserved only in
Tibetan. The mantra st ̣akki h ūm ̇jah ̣andt ̣akki jah ̣hoh ̣, numbered 116 and 117, are
found in a part of the text not preserved in the single Sanskrit manuscript.
127 Sundberg 2004: 164 n. 3. The four inscriptions mentioned without further references in
that footnote can all be found discussed in Damais ( 1955a :2 9 –30 n. 1, 236); see also
Stutterheim ( 1932 ) on three of the four. Note that the inscription called “Vihāra”by
Damais was found in Jragung, one of the two possible provenances indicated for the
first inscription in the previous section.
128 Other examples of t ̣/pmisreadings by previous scholars unfamiliar with these kinds of
mantric syllables have been pointed out in Cruijsen et al. (forthcoming, n. 46).WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 177

--- [Page 44] ---
markers served the purpose of removing obstacles. For at Sarvavajrodaya sec-
tion 56, we read (Mikky ōSeiten Kenky ūkai 1986 –87: 267):
atyantanirvighnam ̇kartuk āmena mr ̥ttikay āpracch ādanīyāh ̣| evam api
yadi vighnam ̇kurvanti | vajrah ūm ̇kārayogam ̇kr ̥tvāt ̣akkir ājenākr ̥s ̣ya
vajrān ̇kuśādibhir apy ākars ̣an ̣ādikam ̇kr ̥tvāvajrah ūm ̇kāram ̇baddhv ā
vāmapādena vighnapratikr ̥timākramya HŪM ̇VAM ̇HŪM ̇ityādivivardhanayog āt
praty ālīd ̣hapādāvasthito ’ntarāntarāca megh ādyabhimukh īm ̇tām ̇mudr ām ̇
ks ̣ipet | gagan ̣odāraspharan ̣adīptajv ālākulaprabhen ̣a vajrah ūm ̇kāren ̣a
pādaprah ārābhigh ātena megh ādikam ̇bhasm īkr ̥yamān ̣am ̇129cintayet |
evam ̇ghātitābhavanti |
He who wishes to effect complete freedom from obstacles should cover
them (i.e. the effigies of the directional deities who might cause trouble,
pinned down in section 55) with mud. If in this condition ( evam ) they
[still] make trouble, he should immerse himself in [the deity]
Vajrah ūm ̇kāra and adduct them with the T ̣akkir āja; should also adduct
them etc. with the Vajra-goads etc.; should bind the [seal of]
Vajrah ūm ̇kāra; and should step on the effigy of the obstacle with his left
foot. After the practice of [self-]expansion with HŪM ̇VAM ̇HŪM ̇etc., he
should stand in praty ālīd ̣hastance, should throw that seal in the direction
of the clouds etc., in between each of them, and should visualize that the
clouds etc. are being burnt to ashes by Vajrah ūm ̇kāra who shines like
dense blazing fire expanding high in the sky and strikes [the obstacles]
with his foot. In this way they are struck down.130
From the evidence of Guhyasam ājatantra 14.22, where the mantra om ̇t ̣akki
hūm ̇jah ̣is explicitly called sarvatath āgatat ̣akkir ājamah ākrodha “the great
wrath of all Tath āgatas who is [named] T ̣akkir āja”, it seems that t ̣akki-
rājenākr ̥s ̣yacan be interpreted as “having adducted by reciting the mantra
named T ̣akkir āja”, and that the intended mantra is the one that concerns us
here.131The position of the mantra in the three stone inscriptions corresponds
precisely to that of the more familiar expression avighnam astu “let there be
no obstacles! ”found in several Javanese inscriptions of the ninth century
onwards; one of these even opens more elaborately with om ̇avighnam astu
gan ̣apataye namah ̣“OM ̇, let there be no obstacles! Homage to Gan ̣apati (the
god who removes obstacles) ”.132
129 Understand ° kriyam ān ̣am ̇.
130 The translation proposed here is based on the idea, communicated to me by Ryugen
Tanemura (email of 04/10/2012) that vivardhanayoga might mean that the practitioner,
who is identical with Vajrah ūm ̇kāra, becomes gigantic by uttering hūm ̇vam ̇hūm ̇, and in
this condition is able to remove the obstacles symbolized by the clouds, etc.
131 As Sundberg ( 2003 : 173) has noted, the context of the mantra h ūm ̇t ̣akki jjah ̣in the
Sarvatath āgatatattvasam ̇graha (Horiuchi 1983 : section 662) is likewise that of
ākars ̣an ̣a“(violent) adduction ”.
132 To mention just some of the oldest inscriptions: Balin ̇avan (813 Śaka), Sugih Manek
(837 Śaka), Kinar ə(849 Śaka); the longer formula is found in the Gulun ̇-Gulun ̇178 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 45] ---
The fourth stone inscription with t ̣aki jah ̣hūm ̇comprises only a mantra ,
and has been read paki h ūm ̇jah ̣jah ̣hūm ̇waho paki h ūm ̇jah ̣jah ̣hūm ̇waho
(that is, twice paki h ūm ̇jah ̣jah ̣hūm ̇waho ) by Damais, from a plaster cast kept
in Leiden, the whereabouts of the original inscription being unknown. In the
Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā(6.2.9, Inui 1992 : 139), in a section on the consecration
of the Tantric master, I find om ̇t ̣akki jah ̣hūm ̇vam ̇hoh ̣, which is virtually
the same mantra and allows us to predict how Damais ’reading may be
improved.133I have not yet found this in any scriptural source, and alas we
have in this case neither context nor original artefact to help us understand the
Figure 11. Bronze sculpture under inventory number 1987.142.171. Photo
courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
inscription (851 Śaka). The openings of three of these four inscriptions are conveniently
transliterated in Damais ( 1955a : 39, 53, 104); for Sugih Manek, see Brandes ( 1913 : 37).
133 Ryugen Tanemura has written to me in an email of 10/08/2012: “The equivalent part of
theSarvavajrodaya , available only in Tibetan, reads t ̣akki dzah ̣ho(=t ̣akki jah ̣ho, with
hoa corruption of hoh ̣?). The sequence jah ̣hūm ̇vam ̇hoh ̣is a very strong unit in Buddhist
tantras. So it is highly likely that t ̣akki jah ̣hoh ̣came to be ‘corrected ’or‘revised ’tot ̣akki
jah ̣hūm ̇vam ̇hoh ̣”. Unless we presume that the correspondence between the Javanese
mantra inscription and the mantra in the Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik āis coincidental, this “cor-
rection ”or“revision ”must have taken place before the mantra came to be used in this
form in ninth- or tenth-century Java.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 179

--- [Page 46] ---
function of this inscription. Finally, I must add to this record the mantric sequence
t ̣aki h ūm ̇jah ̣dah ̣hūm ̇kit ̣ain the lead-bronze inscription from Borobudur already
mentioned a few times above.134
8. Bronze image of Vairocana at the Metropolitan Museum of Art
A small bronze image of Vairocana in vajraparyan ̇kāsana and displaying
bodhyagr īmudr āis held at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York,
under number 1987.142.171 ( Figure 11 ). To my knowledge, it is so far unpub-
lished,135no doubt because the iconography is very well known from other, better
preserved specimens. But the inscription engraved on the figure ’sb a s el e n d si t
importance from perspectives other than art history. The script is that of Ce ntral
Java, i.e. Kawi, in the ninth or tenth century. Excellent photos are view able online
through the Museum ’s website, and allow the following reading:
(1)○pratītya dharma pa(j ā)(2)(ya)nte n āsti dharmah ̣(svabh āvata) (3)h ̣| ye [pra]
(tyī)tya (pra)j āna(4)te te j ānant(i) dharmat ām ̇○
This is a surprisingly corrupt anus ̣t ̣ubhstanza, that I hesitantly restore as follows:136
pratītya dharm āh ̣prajāyante n āsti dharmah ̣svabh āvatah ̣|
ye prat ītya praj ānate te te j ānanti dharmat ām| |
If the emendations are correct, then we may translate as follows:
Entities come into being dependently. There is no entity that derives from
an independent existence. Those who understand dependent [origination],
they know the true nature of reality.
This is a very basic expression of the core Buddhist doctrine of dependent ori-
gination ( pratītyasamutp āda). Although I am unable to trace this verse in any
preserved scriptural text, it could very well have been put in the Buddha ’s
mouth in some Buddhist scripture now lost (or no longer available in
Sanskrit), for a gāthāmuch like this one, and likewise untraceable in known
scriptures, is found attributed to the Buddha in Candrak īrti’sPrasannapad ā
onkārikā4.19 (de la Vallée Poussin 1903 –13: 505):
uktam ̇ca bhagavat ā|
pratītyadharm ān adhigacchate vid ūna cāntadr ̥s ̣t ̣īya karoti ni śrayam |
sahetu sapratyaya dharma j ānati ahetu apratyaya n āsti dharmat ā|| iti
134 Side B, line 4, published as paki h ūm ̇jahdah h ūm ̇hitaby Boechari ( 1982 :9 4= 2012 :
586). My reading is based on photographs of the inscription by Sugeng Riyanto, kindly
furnished by Titi Surti Nastiti. See now Griffiths 2014.
135 Even though it is part of the stupendous Eilenberg collection, and was donated in 1987,
the piece is not included in Lerner and Kossak 1991 .
136 Note that pādaa is hypermetrical, while c shows substandard ja-vipul ā.180 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 47] ---
I quote the translation by Jacques May ( 1959 : 240):
Le Bienheureux dit également: « Le sage pénètre les dharma dans leur
conditionnalité. Il ne prend pas appui sur la vue fausse des extrêmes. Il
sait qu ’undharma a des causes, des conditions: l ’absence de cause, de
condition n ’est pas [dans] la nature des dharma ».
It seems reasonable to assume that this gāthā, engraved on the base of the image
of Vairocana, served as dharma -relic, just like the stanzas engraved on a silver
foil inserted into the base of the Sambas sculpture discussed above (section 1) or
the texts on gold foil or clay tablets inserted into relic caskets and stūpas (sec-
tions 5, 9 and 10). And in this sense, this inscription is comparable to the other
material presented in this paper.
9. Clay sealings from Bali
In Machi Suhadi ’s article on “Buddhist mantras in the ASEAN states ”, the
author ’s“mantra formula II ”(1989: 117), a text originally published by
Stutterheim ( 1929 : 38), can be identified with a widespread Buddhist dhāran ̣ī.
The text is found stamped in Siddham ātr ̥kāscript on small clay sealings found
at Pejeng and (not far from Pejeng) at Blahbatuh,137inserted into miniature
stūpas of unbaked clay. The reading published by Stutterheim was as follows:138
namah ̣traya(va) savatath āgata tadapagantam ̇jvalajvaladhamadh āālasam ̇-
harasam ̇hara āyussam ̇sādhaāyussam ̇sādha savasatv ānām ̇pāpam ̇sarvatath ā-
gata samant ās ̣rī(th)a vimala śuddha sv āhā
This text can now be identified as the Vimalos ̣n ̣īs ̣adhāran ̣ī. The following is the
version of that dhāran ̣īin a Dunhuang manuscript dating to about the ninth/tenth
century published by Cristina Scherrer-Schaub ( 1994 : 712):
tadyath āom ̇namas traiyadhvik ānām ̇sarvatath āgatahr ̥dayagarbhe jvala
dharmadh ātugarbhe | sam ̇haran ̣aāyum ̇sam ̇śodhaya p āpam ̇| sarvatath ā-
gatasamante us ̣n ̣īs ̣avimalavi śuddhe sv āhā||
There are some differences between this version and the Balinese sealings, but it
is in any case clear from Schopen ’s(1985 ) study of this text that the transmis-
sion of this dhāran ̣īthroughout Buddhist Asia was not very stable.139Moreover,
it is only natural that Stutterheim ’s ignorance of the identity of the text,
137 From Stutterheim ’s wording in 1929 , it is unclear whether he knew only one or more
than one specimen. It becomes clear from Stutterheim ’s1931 contribution that multiple
small stūpas have been found containing seals with this text, sometimes together with a
seal showing the ye dharm āh ̣formula.
138 It was repeated verbatim by Machi Suhadi as well as Putu Budiastra and Wayan Widia
(1980 –81: 56).
139 Several specimens, often with significant variant readings, are found on pp. 332 –4o f
the 2005 reprint of this study; see p. 339 for addenda mentioning a specimen from
Ratnagiri.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 181

--- [Page 48] ---
combined with the challenges of reading a text stamped in miniature size on this
kind of material, has caused several misreadings. Luckily, a fairly good photo-
graph showing two specimens of clay sealings stamped with the same matrix of
this text was published by Putu Budiastra and Wayan Widia ( 1980 –81: photo 9),
which I reproduce here as Figure 12 . On this basis, I am able to propose the fol-
lowing synthetic edition of the text as it was transmitted to Bali:
(1)nama(s tre)ya(dhva)sarvatath ā-
(2)gatahr ̥dayagarbhe jvala jvala dha-
(3)rmadh ātugarbhe sam ̇hara sam ̇hara ā-
(4)yus sa(m ̇)sodha ( ā)yus sam ̇śodha140
(5)sarvasatv ānām ̇pāpa(m ̇) sarvata-
(6)thāga(ta)samantos ̣n ̣īs ̣a(vi)-
(7)malaś(u)ddhe sv āhā141
Finding myself somewhat in disagreement with the way Scherrer-Schaub has
translated her reconstituted text for the Dunhuang manuscript ( 1994 : 713), I pro-
pose here the following translation, starting from the Balinese text, which is not
essentially different:
Figure 12. Two sealings from Bali. Reproduced from Putu Budiastra and
Wayan Widia 1980 –81, photo 9.
140 All other versions have twice or only once sam ̇śodhaya , and I assume that this word
form is intended here twice too, instead of sam ̇sodha andsam ̇śodha .
141 An anonymous reviewer has added the observation that this dhāran ̣īwas used as a per-
sonal protective spell by the Palola S ̣āhi Navasurendr ātyanandi during the seventh cen-
tury (cf. von Hinüber 2004 : 14 ff.), and that while in Bali it begins by namas treyadhva ,
in Gilgit it begins with om ̇strr ̥yadhe . According to the reviewer, this shows that the first
word originally was indeed namas , whose - swas preserved in the ligature strr ̥, when
namas was replaced by om ̇.182 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 49] ---
Homage! O you [female deity of this dhāran ̣ī] who bear as womb the
essence of all Tath āgatas of the three ages (past, present and future):
burn, burn the evil of all beings! O you [ dhāran ̣ī-deity] who bear as
womb the dharma -relic: destroy, destroy [the evil]! Purify life, purify
life!142O [you dhāran ̣ī-deity] who are immaculately pure like all the cra-
nial protuberances of all Tath āgatas! Hail!
It is clear from the rich evidence adduced by Schopen ( 1985 ) that the practice of
stamping this dhāran ̣īon clay and installing it in a stūpais precisely in agree-
ment with the way this text was used in other parts of the Buddhist world. The
dating of these specimens is very hard to estimate on the basis of palaeography,
but a date between 800 and 1000 CEseems likely.
More exceptional is the case of “mantra formula III ”on the other clay object
mentioned by Machi Suhadi ( 1989 : 117 –8). It was originally read as follows by
Stutterheim ( 1935 : 88):
ity api sa bhagav ān arhan samyaksam ̇buddho vidy ācaran ̣asam ̇pannah ̣suga-
tālokavidyanuttarah ̣parus ̣adasyum āravig āsuradevamanus ̣yān ̣ām ̇niddho
bhagava –
I do not have access to a photo of any sealing bearing this text, so I cannot verify
Stutterheim ’s decipherment, but the text must be very similar if not identical to
one of the many variants of the list of ten epithets of the Buddha.143A particu-
larly close (if not identical) parallel is the phrase ity api sa bhagav ām ̇s tath āgato
’rhan samyaksam ̇buddho vidy ācaran ̣asam ̇pannah ̣sugato lokavid anuttarah ̣
purus ̣adamyas ārathih ̣śāstādevamanus ̣yān ̣ām ̇buddho bhagav ān iti, found in
theBodhisattvabh ūmi1.7 (Wogihara 1930 –36: 93). It means something like
this: “Thus also the Lord is [known as] Tath āgata, fully awakened, Arhant,
endowed with knowledge and [good] conduct, the Sugata, Supreme knower
of the world, Coachman of men who need to be tamed, Teacher of gods and
men, the Buddha, the Lord ”. This formula is in any case not a mantra .
10. A gold foil from Pura Pagulingan on Bali
Finally, the last section of Machi Suhadi ’s article ( 1989 :1 1 8 –9) was dedicated to a
number of inscribed artefacts recovered during the dismantling of the temple Pura
Pagulingan in preparation for its reconstruction. It was discovered then t hat the
foundations showed an octagonal groundplan. It was at this level that two pieces
of gold foil were discovered, beside a terracotta tablet (bearing the ye dharm āh ̣for-
m u l a )a n das i l v e rf o i lb e a r i n gaf e w aks ̣aras.144The first gold foil, rectangular in
shape, was inscribed with a repeated ye dharm āh ̣formula. Machi Suhadi also gives
the text of the second gold foil, oval in shape, with three lines of writing in ci rcles,
142 I presume that the place of sarvasatv ānām ̇pāpam ̇, removed from the verbs jvala jvala
andsam ̇hara sam ̇hara that govern this object, is due to clumsy expansion of an origin-
ally shorter text. This would have to have happened prior to the archetype of all existing
versions known to me.
143 On this list, see Lamotte 1944 : 115 –44.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 183

--- [Page 50] ---
referring in n. 31 to an unpublished report by Boechari ( 1985b ). Having recently
prepared the publication of this report from the author ’s own typescript
(Boechari 2012: 526 –8), I am able now to cite the reading precisely as Boechari
saw it, without the copying mistakes in Machi Suhadi ’s publication:
(1)om ̐hrih ̣om ̐jayāta svāhāom ̐s ̣adavitāsvāhāom ̐dhūhum ̇jaya sv āhānamah ̣
(2)trailokyavijay āmoghap ās ̣āpratiha tohrih ̣hah ̣hīh ̣hum ̇
(3)om ̐phat krih ̣hrih ̣svāhā||
This comprises five mantra s, each introduced by om ̐, of which the fourth and
most extensive is clearly identifiable as that which is called the upahr ̥dayaman-
traof the Amoghap āśahr ̥dayadh āran ̣īin the edition by Kimura ( 1979 : 245
[12]), where this mantra does not appear to hold a particularly important pos-
ition. This edition, however, is based only on late Nepalese manuscripts, and
is altogether much less useful for historical research than the two painstaking
publications by Meisezahl ( 1962 ,1965 ), which present witnesses conserving
the text in a considerably more archaic state. Several witnesses –a Dunhuang
manuscript containing an old Tibetan recension (possibly dating to the ninth
century), a twelfth-century Sanskrit manuscript held at Cambridge University
Library, and a Siddham ātr ̥kāmanuscript preserved in Japan, apparently repre-
senting an old transmission of the Sanskrit text independent from that in
Nepal –do not show the labels homamantra ,hr ̥dayamantra ,upahr ̥dayamantra ,
etc., identifying the ritual use of various constituent parts of the dhāran ̣ī.
Furthermore, in both the Dunhuang and the Japanese manuscript, we find the
mantra corresponding to this Balinese inscription precisely at the end of the
dhāran ̣ī, without any of the added mantra s that all (?) other manuscript wit-
nesses show.145In other words, in the oldest versions of the text, the mantra
that we see in Bali was the climax of the mantra portion, and hence it is not sur-
prising that it would be chosen to stand for the whole. Also, the various manu-
script witnesses show substantial variants among themselves for this sequence of
mantra s at the end of the dhāran ̣ī, so it seems unproblematic that the Balinese
version is not identical to any other known version. Anyhow, now that the iden-
tity of this mantra has been determined, it must be kept in mind that the readings
of this gold foil inscription from Bali are liable to be improved if the original
could be inspected or good reproductions be made available.
Even though we do not know the precise archaeological context in which this
gold foil was found, the function of this artefact may again rather clearly be
inferred from the frame text of the dhāran ̣ī(Meisezahl 1962 : 313):
144 See Soekmono ( 1995 : 119 –20) for a brief report on the context of the excavations and
finds at Pura Pagulingan, along with plate 5 at the back of the book. Alas, the gold foil
that concerns us here is not explicitly mentioned.
145 The manner of editing chosen by Meisezahl for the Sanskrit text, taking the old
Nepalese manuscript (Cambridge Or. Ms. 152, siglum “P”) as basic text, means that
the reader must infer on p. 324 of Meisezahl 1962 that the intrusive mantra s are indeed
found in this witness. Photos kindly supplied by the Sanskrit Manuscripts Project,
Cambridge, have allowed me to confirm that Meisezahl ’s edition is reliable in this
regard, as indeed it seems to be in general.184 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 51] ---
yasmim ̇śca punar bhagavan pr ̥thivīprade śe idam amoghap āśahr ̥dayam ̇
pracaret veditavyam ̇ bhagavam ̇s tasmin pr ̥thivīprade śe
īśvaramahe śvarabrahmak āyikapramukh āni dv ādaśadevaputra śatasahasr ān ̣i
raks ̣āvaran ̣aguptaye sth āsyanti || caityasam ̇mato bhagavan sa ca
pr ̥thivīprade śo bhavis ̣yati yatredam amoghap āśahr ̥dayam ̇pracaris ̣yati |
This is the translation given in Schopen ( 1976 [2005 ]: 36):
And again, O Blessed One, on which spot of earth this
Amoghap āśahr ̥daya would circulate, it is to be known that on that spot
of earth, O Blessed One, 12 × 100,000 devaputras, headed by Īśvaras,
Mahe śvaras and the devas belonging to Brahma, will dwell for the purpose
of protecting and shielding and guarding it. That spot of earth, O Blessed
One, where this Amoghap āśahr ̥daya will circulate will become a highly
honored sacred place.
We may hence assume that our inscription represents the epitome of the dhāran ̣ī,
and its production must have been motivated by a similar intent to the inscription
of Batu Bedil presented in section 2. In contrast to the Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtra, which
was the source text there, it must however be pointed out that there is not, in the
Amoghap āśahr ̥daya, any emphasis on “writing down ”the text.
Conclusion
I have presented a fairly wide range of Indonesian inscriptions citing gāthās,
mantra s and dhāran ̣īs, providing rather eloquent written testimony to the fact
that the Indonesian archipelago was an integral part of the ancient Buddhist
world. I hope to have shown that this epigraphical material, thus far very little
known outside of Indonesia, deserves the attention of historians of Indian and
pan-Asian Buddhism. I have simultaneously tried to contextualize the
Indonesian data in the light of Buddhist texts not preserved in the archipelago,
hoping to aid Indonesian scholars towards an appreciation of this material.
Indeed, the primary source for interpreting why a given citation was produced
in the form of an inscription will always be the textual frame from which the
citation is extracted.
I have been able positively to identify the source texts for most of the
gāthā,mantra and dhāran ̣īinscriptions presented in this article. Despite
the fact that we are mostly dealing with very short segments of text, there
have been several instances where this material has offered readings that
are of philological significance for the critical study of the source texts.
These are, in Sanskrit alphabetical order (and limiting myself to sou rce
texts for which a Sanskrit recension is preserved), the Aparamit āyuh ̣sūtra,
the Bodhigarbh ālam ̇kāralaks ̣adhāran ̣ī,t h e Bhadracaripran ̣idhāna,t h e
Vajracchedik āPrajñ āpāramit ā,a n dt h e Vimalos ̣n ̣īs ̣adhāran ̣ī.M o r e
tentative identifications have involved the Kāran ̣d ̣avyūha,t h e
Mah āpratisar āmah āvidyārājñī, the Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra and the
Sarvavajrodaya . If we may assume that the citation of mantra s and dhāran ̣īs
from such source texts implies the availability of manuscripts of these texts asWRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 185

--- [Page 52] ---
such, then I would seem to have made a big leap in determining which were the
written Sanskrit vectors of Buddhism in ancient Indonesia. For with the excep-
tion of the Mah āpratisar āmah āvidyārājñī, the dissemination of none of these
texts had thus far been proven on the basis of written evidence.
But is it really true that we may infer as much? Schopen has repeatedly
addressed this question in his work on Indian dhāran ̣īinscriptions, and has
tended to answer in the affirmative. See e.g. Schopen ’s discussion of inscriptions
with the Vimalos ̣n ̣īs ̣adhāran ̣ī(1985 [2005 ]: 336):
The identification of the dhāran ̣īon the seals and the “Schutzformel ”
found at Gilgit proves again that either the Samantamukhaprave śaor the
Shes pas thams cad or both were known and actually used during the
sixth to the ninth centuries at Paharpur in Bengal, at Bodhgay āand
Nālandāin Bihar, and at Gilgit. It could, of course, be argued that only
thedhāran ̣īitself was known and available in these places. But that is dif-
ficult to maintain since a knowledge of the dhāran ̣īby itself cannot
account for the fact that the dhāran ̣īis found in all four places in exactly
the same setting: pressed into lumps of clay or written on birchbark and
deposited in a stūpa. It is, in fact, only a knowledge of the texts that con-
tain this dhāran ̣īand explain how it is to be used that can account for this
setting.
I am less confident about this matter than Schopen was thirty years ago. For
instance, the Balinese version of the Amoghap āśahr ̥daya mantra , engraved in
a circle on gold foil, does not conform to any instruction in that text. This
means that practice was not bound by text, and I find myself quite easily able
to imagine the transmission of mantra s and dhāran ̣īs by themselves, in specific
material and ritual contexts, outside of the frame of larger texts containing
instructions on their use. In this connection, it may also be pointed out that
none of the Indonesian inscriptions presented here comprises any part of the
prose that frames the mantra so rdhāran ̣īs in their respective source texts, differ-
ent from several of the Indian cases published by Schopen. In fact I know of just
one Indonesian mantra inscription where any of the framing prose is included in
the citation; it will be published elsewhere.146
In whichever way we have to imagine that these mantra s and dhāran ̣īs
reached the Indonesian archipelago, it has become clear that the range of such
texts that was used in this part of the Buddhist world must have been quite simi-
lar to the texts that were used in other Buddhist countries. As Schopen puts it
(1989a [2005 ]: 336): “It is this group of texts that begins to make sense out
of the picture of Buddhism that emerges from our archaeological sources ”.
Schopen has insisted on one other point, which it is important to repeat in the
context of Indonesian studies, where many ideas from the colonial period still
linger. There is nothing at all “Tantric ”about most of the inscriptions and source
texts that have occupied me in this contribution, “if by ‘Tantric ’we mean that
146 It is the gold foil inscription from Aek Sangkilon (North Sumatra), dating to the thir-
teenth century, to be published in Griffiths forthcoming (§1.2). The source text there
is the Hevajratantra .186 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 53] ---
phase of Buddhist doctrinal development which is characterized by an emphasis
on the central function of the guru as religious preceptor; by sets –usually
graded –of specific initiations; by esotericism of doctrine, language and organ-
ization; and by a strong emphasis on the realization of the goal through highly
structured ritual and meditative techniques ”(1982 [2005 ]: 310). The material I
have discussed largely comprises “texts dealing with ritual forms open to all and
religious problems common to all –monks, nuns, lay men and women ”(1989a
[2005]: 337). However, a few of the inscriptions presented here may be labelled
“Tantric ”, in the sense that their source texts belong to “Tantric ”Buddhist
(Mantranaya) literature, such as the Sarvatath āgatatattvasam ̇graha , the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra , and the Sarvavajrodaya .147
With the exception of one relatively restricted area, I have for this paper cast
my net all over the Indonesian archipelago.148I have not focused on any particu-
lar period, but unintentionally the material presented here has turned out all to
belong, with a fair degree of certainty, to the period before the turn of the second
millennium of our era. Even though we know that Buddhism still thrived during
the eleventh to fourteenth centuries in East Java, which was politically dominant
in that period, very few inscriptions of the kind presented here have so far come
to my attention from that part of the island, and none that could be included
here.149It seems possible that we see here a reflection of changes in the practice
of Buddhism on Java during the “East Javanese period ”, but it would be impru-
dent to draw such a conclusion from the very limited and largely negative evi-
dence available so far.
Bibliography
Bambang Budi Utomo. 2006. “Sambas in the history of West Borneo ”,i n
Truman Simanjuntak, M. Hisyam, Bagyo Prasetyo and Titi Surti Nastiti (eds),
Archaeology: Indonesian Perspective, R.P. Soejono ’s Festschrift . Jakarta, 343 –448.
Bentor, Yael. 1995. “On the Indian origins of the Tibetan practice of depositing relics
and dhāran ̣īsi ns t ūpas and images ”,Journal of the American Oriental Society
115, 248 –61.
Bhattacharya, Benoytosh. 1968. Sādhanam ālā. 2 vols. Baroda.
Bloomfield, Maurice. 1906. A Vedic Concordance . Cambridge, MA.
147 For a mantra inscription of a different type, but also positively “Tantric ”in this sense,
see Griffiths, Revire and Sanyal ( 2013 ).
148 Comparable material from Buddhist sites in the northern provinces of Sumatra (Padang
Lawas and Muara Takus) will be presented in a separate article dedicated to the epigra-
phical record of that part of Indonesia (Griffiths forthcoming); the material here can be
called “tantric ”without any hesitation, for it is dominated by the cult of Hevajra, and it
all dates to the first three or four centuries of the second millennium CE.
149 There are two rectangular gold foils held in Museum Mpu Tantular in Sidoarjo, of
unknown provenance, both of which seem to show the short mantra om ̇āh ̣hūm ̇at
the opening of two more extensive sequences of mantra s, which I am not yet able to
read in full. I await better documentation before attempting to publish these two inscrip-
tions. The same is true for the inscriptions mentioned and deciphered in a booklet by
Issatriadi ( 1976 –77: 15), where two round inscribed gold foils are shown in photos
at the back of the booklet, but their text is, alas, not verifiable. All in all, my impression
is still that East Java may not be rich in mantra /dhāran ̣īinscriptions.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 187

--- [Page 54] ---
Boechari. 1964. “Prof. Dr R.Ng. Poerbatjaraka Ahli Epigrafi Perintis Bangsa Indonesia ”,
Madjalah Ilmu-Ilmu Sastra Indonesia 2.2 ( Nomor Persembahan kepada Prof. Dr
R.M. Ng. Poerbatjaraka berhubungan dengan ulang tahun beliau ke-80 dari para
murid beliau ): 119 –125.
Boechari. 1976. “Some considerations on the problem of the shift of Mataram ’s center of
government from Central to East Java in the 10thcentury A.D. ”, Jakarta. [ Bulletin of
the Research Center of Archaeology of Indonesia no. 10.]
Boechari. 1979. “Report on research on Sr īwijaya ”, in SPAFA, Final Report, Workshop
on Research on Srivijaya , Appendix 3a, Part I, 1 –7.
Boechari. 1981. “Report on research on Sriwijaya ”,i nStudies on Srivijaya . Jakarta, 79 –
84.
Boechari. 1982. “Preliminary report on some archaeological finds around the Borobudur
Temple ”,i n Pelita Borobudur Seri CC No. 5 (Reports and Documents of the
Consultative Committee for the Safeguarding of Borobudur, 5thmeeting, April
1976), 90 –96.
Boechari. 1985a. “Ritual deposits of Candi Gumpung (Muara Jambi) ”, in SPAFA, Final
Report Consultative Workshop on Archaeological and Environmental Studies on
Srivijaya (I-W2b), Appendix 7d, 229 –43.
Boechari. 1985b. “Laporan hasil pembacaan pripih dari Pura Pagulingan ”. Typescript.
Boechari. 2012. Melacak Sejarah Kuno Indonesia Lewat Prasasti. Tracing Ancient
Indonesian History through Inscriptions . Jakarta.
Bosch, F.D.K. 1929. “Twee belangrijke aanwinsten voor het Museum ”,Feestbundel uit-
gegeven door het Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen
bij gelegenheid van zijn 150 jarig bestaan, 1778 –1928, vol. I. Weltevreden, 39 –48.
Bosch, F.D.K. 1938. “De Bhadracar īafgebeeld op den hoofdmuur der vierde gaanderij
van den Baraboed ̣oer”,Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 97: 241 –91.
Boucher, Daniel. 1991. “The Prat ītyasamutp ādagāthāand its role in the medieval cult
of the relics ”,Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 14: 1 –27.
Bradell, Roland. 1949. “A note on Sambas and Borneo ”,Journal of the Malayan Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society 22/4: 1 –15.
Brandes, J.L.A. 1889. “Een Oud-Javaansch alfabet van Midden-Java ”,Tijdschrift voor
Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 32: 441 –54.
Brandes, J.L.A. 1913. Oud-Javaansche Oorkonden . Nagelaten transscripties van wijlen
Dr. J.L.A. Brandes. Uitgegeven door Dr. N.J. Krom. Batavia ’s-Hage.
Brinkgreve, Francine and Retno Sulistianingsih (eds). 2009. Sumatra: Crossroads of
Cultures . Leiden.
De Casparis, J.G. 1956. Selected Inscriptions from the 7thto the 9thCentury A.D.
[Prasasti Indonesia II.] Bandung.
De Casparis, J.G. 1975. Indonesian Palaeography. A History of Writing in Indonesia
from the Beginnings to c. A.D. 1500 . Leiden and Cologne.
Cœdès, George. 1930. “Les inscriptions malaises de Çr īvijaya ”,BEFEO 30: 29 –80.
Conze, Edward. 1957. Vajracchedik āPrajñ āpāramit ā. Edited and translated with intro-
duction and glossary. Rome.
Crucq, K.C. 1929. “Epigrafische Aanteekeningen ”,Oudheidkundig Verslag 1929,
Bijlage I: 258 –83.
Cruijsen, Thomas, Arlo Griffiths and Marijke Klokke. Forthcoming. “The cult of the
Buddhist dhāran ̣īdeity Mah āpratisar āalong the Maritime Silk Route: new epigraphi-
cal and iconographic evidence from the Indonesian archipelago ”,Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies 35 (2012, to appear in 2014).188 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 55] ---
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1951. “Etudes d ’épigraphie indonésienne. I: Méthode de
réduction des dates javanaises en dates européennes ”,BEFEO 45/1: 1 –41.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1952. “Etudes d ’épigraphie indonésienne. III: Liste des princi-
pales inscriptions datées de l ’Indonésie ”,BEFEO 46/1: 1 –105.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1955a. “Etudes d ’épigraphie indonésienne. IV: Discussion de la
date des inscriptions ”,BEFEO 47/1: 7 –290.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1955b. “Les écritures d ’origine indienne en Indonésie et dans le
Sud-Est Asiatique continental ”,Bulletin de la Société des Études Indo-Chinoises n.s.
30: 365 –82. [Indonesian translation in Damais 1995: 3 –25.]
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1962. “Études soumatranaises. I. La date de l ’inscription de
Hujung Langit ”,BEFEO 50/2: 275 –88. [Indonesian translation in Damais 1995: 27 –45.]
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1963. “Bibliographie indonésienne. V. Publications du Service
archéologique de l ’Indonésie ”,BEFEO 51/2: 535 –82.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1967. “Bibliographie indonésienne IX. Une publication récente
du service archéologique de l ’Indonésie ”,BEFEO 53/2: 685 –94.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1970. Répertoire onomastique de l ’épigraphie javanaise
(jusqu ’à pu Sin ̣d ̣okŚrī Īśānawikrama Dharmottun ̇gadewa) . Paris.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1995. Epigrafi dan Sejarah Nusantara. Pilihan Karangan
Louis-Charles Damais . Jakarta.
Djoko Dwiyanto. 1985. “Hasil sementara ekskavasi Selomerto: suatu tinjauan arsitektur
dan ikonografi ”,i nPertemuan Ilmiah Arkeologi III , Ciloto, 23 –28 Mei 1983, 438 –54.
Domela Nieuwenhuis, F.J. 1983. “Het wijdingsdepot van een poesaka ”,Antiek:
Tijdschrift voor liefhebbers en kenners van oude kunst en kunstnijverheid , 18/4:
202–09.
Drewes, David. 2007. “Revisiting the phrase ‘sa pr ̥thivīprade śaścaityabh ūto bhavet ’
and the Mah āyāna cult of the book ”,Indo-Iranian Journal 50: 101 –43.
Duan Qing. [1992]. Das Khotanische Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtra. Ausgabe, Übersetzung,
Kommentar und Glossar . Reinbek.
Dutt, Nalinaksha. 1939. Gilgit Manuscripts , Vol. 1. Srinagar. Reprint Delhi, 1984.
Filliozat, Jean. 1941. Catalogue du fonds sanscrit . Bibliothèque nationale. Départements
des manuscrits. Fascicule I –Nos1 à 165. Paris.
Funke, Friedrich W. 1958. Orang Abung. Volkstum Süd-Sumatras im Wandel . Band I:
Kulturgeschichte der Abung-Stämme von der megalithischen Zeit bis zur
Gegenwart. Leiden.
Furui, Ryosuke. 2011. “Panchrol (Egra) copperplate inscription or the time of Śaśān ̇ka:
A re-edition ”.Pratna Samiksha , New Series, vol. 2 (Kolkata: Centre for
Archaeological Studies & Training, Eastern India), 119 –30.
Giebel, Rolf. 1993. “Bassai kunan darani ky ōzakkō[A Note on the Pa-chi k ‘u-nan
t‘o-lo-ni ching ]”.Tōhōgaku 86: 156 –145.
Giebel, Rolf. 2012. “Notes on some Sanskrit texts brought back to Japan by K ūkai”,
Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies , Third Series, 14, Fall
2012, 188 –230.
Gimello, Robert M. 2004. “Icon and incantation: the goddess Zhunti and the role of
images in the Occult Buddhism of China ”, in P. Granoff and K. Shinohara (eds),
Images in Asian Religions: Texts and Contexts . Vancouver, 225 –56.
Gippert, Jost. 2004. “A glimpse into the Buddhist past of the Maldives. I. An early
Prakrit inscription ”,Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 48: 81 –109.
Gippert, Jost. Forthcoming, “A glimpse into the Buddhist past of the Maldives. II. Two
Sanskrit inscriptions ”, paper submitted to Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens .WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 189

--- [Page 56] ---
Goudriaan, T. and C. Hooykaas. 1971. Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and Vais ̣n ̣ava) of
Balinese Brahman Priests . [Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie
van Wetenschappen, afd. Letterkunde, nieuwe reeks, 76.] Amsterdam and London.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2011. “Inscriptions of Sumatra: further data on the epigraphy of the Musi
and Batang Hari river basins ”,Archipel 81: 129 –75.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. “The ‘greatly ferocious ’spell ( Mah ārandra-n āma-hr ̥daya ): a
dhāran ̣iinscribed on a lead-bronze foil unearthed near Borobudur ”, in K. Tropper
(ed.), Epigraphic Evidence in the Pre-Modern Buddhist World: Proceedings of the
Eponymous Conference Held in Vienna . Vienna: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und
Buddhistische Studien.
Griffiths, Arlo. Forthcoming. “Inscriptions of Sumatra, III. The Padang Lawas Corpus
studied along with inscriptions from Sorik Merapi (North Sumatra) and Maura
Takus (Riau) ”, in D. Perret (ed.), History of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra. II:
Societies of Padang Lawas (9th c. –13th c.) . Paris: Association Archipel.
Griffiths, Arlo, Nicolas Revire and Rajat Sanyal. 2013. “An inscribed bronze sculpture
of a Buddha in bhadr āsana at Museum Ranggawarsita in Semarang (Central Java,
Indonesia) ”,Arts Asiatiques 68: 3 –26.
Griswold, A. B. 1966. “Imported images and the nature of copying in the art of Siam ”,
Artibus Asiae 23 (Essays Offered to G.H. Luce) 2: 37 –73.
Gutomo and Niken Wirasanti (eds). 1998. Laporan Purna Pugar Candi Plaosan Lor.
Candi Utama Utara, Gapura Utama Halaman I, Candi Patok, Candi Perwara
Deret II No. 1, Arca Dwarapala . Prambanan: Suaka Peninggalan Sejarah dan
Purbakala Jawa Tengah.
Guy, John. 2011. “Pan-Asian Buddhism and the Bodhisattva cult in Champa ”,i n
TrầnKỳPhương and Bruce M. Lockhart (eds), The Cham of Vietnam: History,
Society and Art . Singapore, 300 –22.
Harrison, Paul. 2006. “Vajracchedik āPrajn āpāramit ā: a new English translation of the
Sanskrit text based on two manuscripts from Greater Gandh āra”, in Jens Braarvig (ed.),
Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, Buddhist Manuscripts , vol. III. Oslo, 133 –59.
Harrison, Paul and Sh ōgo Watanabe. 2006. “Vajracchedik āPrajn āpāramit ā”,i n
Jens Braarvig (ed.), Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection, Buddhist Manuscripts ,
vol. III. Oslo, 89 –132.
Hasan, Djafar. 2010. Kompleks Percandian Batujaya. Rekonstruksi Sejarah Kebudayaan
Daerah Pantai Utara Jawa Barat . Bandung/Jakarta.
Herni Pramastuti et al. 2007. Pusaka Aksara Yogyakarta. Alih Aksara dan Alih Bahasa
Prasasti Koleksi Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Yogyakarta . Yogyakarta.
Hidas, Gergely. 2012. Mah āpratisar ā-Mah āvidyārājñī, The Great Amulet, Great Queen
of Spells. Introduction, Critical Editions and Annotated Translation . New Delhi.
von Hinüber, Oskar. 2004. Die Palola S ̣āhis: Ihre Steininschriften, Inschriften auf
Bronzen, Handschriftenkolophone und Schutzzauber. Materialien zur Geschichte
von Gilgit und Chilas . Mainz.
Hooykaas, C. 1973. Balinese Bauddha Brahmins . [Verhandelingen der Koninklijke
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, afd. Letterkunde, nieuwe reeks, 80.]
Amsterdam and London.
Horiuchi, Kanjin. 1983. Bon-Z ō-Kan Shoe kong ōchōgyōno kenky ū: bonpon k ōtei hen .2
vols. K ōyasan: Mikky ōBunka Kenky ūjo. [Annotated critical edition of the
Sarvatath āgatatattvasam ̇graha .]
Hudaya Kandahjaya. 2009. “The Lord of All Virtues ”,Pacific World: Journal of the
Institute of Buddhist Studies , Third Series, 11, Fall 2009: 1 –24.190 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 57] ---
Inui, Hitoshi. 1988. “Kriyāsam ̇graha ni okeru honzon yuga: bonbun tekisuto (1) ”
[English title: “On the divine yoga (devat āyoga) in the Kriy āsam ̇gvala [ sic]:
Sanskrit text (I)] ”,The Mikkyo Bunka (Quarterly Reports on Esoteric Buddhism)
163: 116 –97. [The text edited in this item was re-edited in the following.]
Inui, Hitoshi. 1991. “Kriyāsam ̇graha no nonzon yuga: bonbun tekisuto j ō[English title:
“On the divine yoga in the Kriy āsam ̇graha: Sanskrit text, part 1] ”,Mikky ōBunka
Kenky ūjo Kiy ō, 4: 184 –151. [Re-edition of the text edited in Inui 1988.]
Inui, Hitoshi. 1992. “Kriyāsam ̇graha no honzon yuga: bonbun tekisuto ch ū[English
title: “On deity yoga in the Kriy āsam ̇graha: Sanskrit text, part 2] ”,Mikky ōBunka
Kenky ūjo Kiy ō5: 160 –133.
Isaacson, Harunaga. 2009. “A collection of Hevajras ādhanas and related works in
Sanskrit ”, in Ernst Steinkellner, Duan Qing and Helmut Krasser (eds), Sanskrit
Manuscripts in China. Proceedings of a Panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on
Tibetan Studies (Beijing 2009), 89 –136.
Ishii, Kazuko. 1992. “The correlation of verses of the Sang Hyang Kamah āyānan
Mantranaya with Vajrabodhi ’sJāpasūtra”,Area and Culture Studies 44: 225 –36.
Issatriadi. 1976 –77. Stupika Tanah Liat Bermaterai Gumuk Klinting . Proyek
Rehabilitasi dan Perluasan Museum Jawa Timur.
Kimura, Takayasu. 1979. “Āryāmoghap āśanāmahr ̥dayam ̇mahāyānasūtram ”,Taish ō
Daigaku S ōgōBukky ōKenky ūjo Kiy ō1: 256(1) –242(15).
Konow, Sten. 1916. “The Aparimit āyuh ̣sūtra. The Old Khotanese version together with
the Sanskrit text and the Tibetan translation ”,i nManuscript Remains of Buddhist
Literature Found in Eastern Turkestan. Facsimiles with Transcripts, Translations,
and Notes . Edited in conjunction with other scholars by A. F. Rudolf Hoernle.
Oxford, 289 –329.
Kōyasan Daigaku Bukky ōgaku Kenky ūshitsu (ed.). 1979. ItōShinj ō, Tanaka Junsh ō
ryōkyōju sh ōtoku kinen bukky ōgaku ronbunsh ū. Osaka: T ōhōShuppan.
Krom, N. J. 1938. “De heiligdommen van Palembang ”,Mededelingen der Koninklijke
Nederlandsche Akademie van Wetenschappen , Afd. Letterkunde, Nieuwe reeks,
deel 1, no. 7: 397 –423.
van der Kuijp, Leonard. 1992. “Notes apropos of the transmission of the
Sarvadurgatipari śodhanatantra in Tibet ”,Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 16: 109 –125.
Lamotte, Étienne. 1944. Le traité de la grande vertu de sagesse de N āgārjuna
(Mah āprajñ āpāramit āśāstra). Tome 1, chapitres I –XV. Première Partie (Traduction
annotée). Louvain.
Lerner, Martin and Steven Kossak. 1991. The Lotus Transcendent. Indian and Southeast
Asian Art from the Samuel Eilenberg Collection . New York.
Liebner, Horst H. 2011. “Cargoes for Java: Interpreting two 10thcentury shipwrecks ”,
paper presented at the 13thConference of the European Association of Southeast
Asian Archaeologists, Berlin 28/10/2011. [Accessible online at: http://leeds.aca-
demia.edu/HorstLiebner/Papers/1282040/
Cargoes_for_Java_Interpreting_Two_10th_Century_ Shipwrecks .]
Lokesh Chandra. 1981. Kāran ̣d ̣avyūha and Other Texts. Sanskrit Manuscripts from
Nepal . New Delhi.
Lokesh Chandra. 1995. “San ̇Hyan ̇Kamah āyānikan ”,i n idem ,Cultural Horizons of
India , volume IV. Delhi, 295 –434.
Luce, Gordon H. 1924. “Countries neighbouring Burma ”,Journal of the Burma
Research Society 14/2: 138 –205.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline and Marijke J. Klokke. 1988. Divine Bronze. Ancient
Indonesian Bronzes from A.D. 600 to 1600 . Leiden.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 191

--- [Page 58] ---
Machi Suhadi. 1989. “Mantra Buddha dari Negara ASEAN ”,i nProceedings Pertemuan
Ilmiah Arkeologi V (Yogyakarta, 4 –7 Juli 1989), part I: Studi Regional/Regional
Studies, Ikatan Ahli Arkeologi Indonesia, 103 –32.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves and Agustijanto Indradjaja. 2011. “The Batujaya site: new evi-
dence of early Indian influence in west Java ”, in P.-Y. Manguin, A. Mani and
Geoff Wade (eds), Early Interactions between South and Southeast Asia:
Reflections on Cross-Cultural Exchange . Singapore, 113 –36.
Matsunaga, Yukei. 1978. The Guhyasam āja tantra . Osaka.
May, Jacques. 1959. Prasannapad āMadhyamakavr ̥tti. Commentaire limpide au Traité
du milieu: douze chapitres traduits du sanscrit et du tibétain, accompagnés d ’une
introduction, de notes et d ’une édition critique de la version tibétaine . Paris.
McKinnon, E. Edwards. 1994. “The Sambas hoard: Bronze drums, and gold ornaments
found in Kalimantan in 1991 ”,Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society 67/1: 9 –28.
Meisezahl, R.O. 1962. “The Amoghap āśahr ̥daya-dh āran ̣ī. The early Sanskrit manuscript of
the Reiunji critically edited and translated ”,Monumenta Nipponica 17/1 –4: 265 –328.
Meisezahl, R.O. 1965. “The Amoghap āśahr ̥daya manuscript formerly kept in the Reiunji
temple and its collateral texts in Tibetan transliteration ”,Mikky ōgaku Mikky ōshi
Ronbunsh ū:Kōyasan Kais ōSenhyakugoj ūnen Kinen/Studies of Esoteric Buddhism
and Tantrism: in Commemoration of the 1,150thAnniversary of the founding of
Koyasan . Koyasan, 179 –216.
Mette, Adelheid. 1997. Die Gilgitfragmente des K āran ̣d ̣avyūha. Swisttal-Odendorf.
Mikky ōSeiten Kenky ūkai. 1986 –87. “Vajradh ātumah āman ̣d ̣alop āyikā-Sarvavajrodaya –
Bonbun tekisuto to wayaku [ Vajradh ātumah āman ̣d ̣alop āyikā-Sarvavajrodaya –
Sanskrit text and Japanese translation] ”,Taish ōDaigaku S ōgōBukky ōKenky ūjō
Nenp ō8 (1986): 257(24) –224(57) and 9 (1987): 294(13) –222(85).
Miksic, John N., Widya Nayati and Tjahjono. 2001. “Recent archaeological research at
Can ̣d ̣i Plaosan ”, in M.J. Klokke and K.R. van Kooij (eds), Fruits of Inspiration,
Studies in Honour of Professor J. G. de Casparis . Groningen, 319 –32.
Mukherji, Ramaranjan and Sachindra Kumar Maity. 1967. Corpus of Bengal
Inscriptions Bearing on History and Civilization of Bengal . Calcutta.
Nihom, Max. 1994. Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism: The
Kuñjarakarn ̣adharmakathana and the Yogatantra . [Publications of the de Nobili
Research Library, 21.] Vienna.
Nihom, Max. 1998. “The man ̣d ̣ala of Candi Gumpung (Sumatra) and the Indo-Tibetan
Vajra śekharatantra ”,Indo-Iranian Journal 41: 245 –54.
Nugrahani, D.S., Slamet Pinardi, Rusmulia Tjiptadi H., and Gutomo. 1998. Katalog
Artefak Temuan Rejoso 1997 . Prambanan Suaka Peninggalan Sejarah dan
Purbakala Provinsi Jawa Tengah. Unpublished.
Osto, Douglas. 2010. “A new translation of the Sanskrit Bhadracar īwith introduction
and notes ”,New Zealand Journal of Asian Studies 12/2: 1 –22.
Payne, Richard K. 2007. “Aparimit āyus: ‘Tantra ’and ‘Pure Land ’in medieval Indian
Buddhism? ”,Pacific World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies , Third
Series, 9, Fall 2007: 273 –308.
Ptak, Roderich. 1998. “Possible Chinese references to the Barus area (Tang to Ming) ”,i n
Claude Guillot (ed.), Histoire de Barus. Le Site de Lobu Tua. Vol. I: Études et
Documents . Paris, 119 –47.
Putu Budiastra and Wayan Widia. 1980 –81.Stupika Tanah Liat Koleksi Museum Bali .
Proyek Pengembangan Permuseuman Bali.192 ARLO GRIFFITHS

--- [Page 59] ---
Ricklefs, M.C. and P. Voorhoeve. 1977. Indonesian Manuscripts in Great Britain.
A Catalogue of Manuscripts in Indonesian Languages in British Public
Collections . (London Oriental Bibliographies, 5.) Oxford.
Sakai, Shinten. 1991. “Juntei butsumo Cund ā”,i nSakai Shinten chosakush ū, vol. 4.
Kyoto: H ōzōkan, 61 –95. [This article was first published in K ōyasan Daigaku
Bukky ōgaku Kenky ūshitsu (ed.), 1979.]
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. “TheŚaiva age: the rise and dominance of Śaivism during the
early medieval period ”, in S. Einoo (ed.), Genesis and Development of Tantrism .
Tokyo, 41 –349.
Scherrer-Schaub, Cristina A. 1994. “Some dh āran ̣īwritten on paper functioning as
Dharmak āya relics. A tentative approach to PT 350 ”, in Per Kvaerne (ed.), Tibetan
Studies, Proceedings of the 6thSeminar of the International Association for
Tibetan Studies, Fagernes 1992 . Oslo, vol. II: 711 –27.
Schopen, Gregory. 1976. “The phrase ‘sa pr ̥thivīprade śaścaityabh ūto bhavet ’in the
Vajracchedik ā: Notes on the cult of the book in Mah āyāna”,Indo-Iranian Journal
17: 147 –81. (Reprinted with stylistic changes in Schopen 2005: 25 –62.)
Schopen, Gregory. 1982. “The text on the ‘Dhāran ̣īstones from Abhayagiriya ’. A minor
contribution to the study of Mah āyāna literature in Ceylon ”,Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies 5/1: 100 –08. (Reprinted with stylistic
changes in Schopen 2005: 306 –13.)
Schopen, Gregory. 1985. “TheBodhigarbh ālam ̇kāralaks ̣aandVimalos ̣n ̣īs ̣aD h āran ̣īsin
Indian inscriptions ”,Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens 29: 119 –49.
(Reprinted with stylistic changes in Schopen 2005: 314 –44.)
Schopen, Gregory. 1989a. “A verse from the Bhadracaripran ̣idhānain a tenth-century
inscription found at N ālandā”,Journal of the International Association of
Buddhist Studies 12/1: 149 –57. (Reprinted with stylistic changes in Schopen 2005:
299–305.)
Schopen, Gregory. 1989b. “The manuscript of the Vajracchedik āfound at Gilgit ”,i n
Luis O. Gómez and Jonathan A. Silk (eds), Studies in the Literature of the Great
Vehicule. Three Mah āyāna Buddhist Texts . Ann Arbor, 89 –139.
Schopen, Gregory. 2005. Figments and Fragments of Mah āyāna Buddhism in India .
More collected papers . Honolulu.
Silk, Jonathan. 2004. “ASūtrafor long life ”, in Donald S. Lopez (ed.), Buddhist
Scriptures . London, 423 –9.
Sircar, D. C. 1965. Select Inscriptions Bearing on Indian History and Civilization ,
Vol. II. From the Sixth Century BC to the Sixth Century AD . 2nd edn. Calcutta.
Reprint Delhi, 1993.
Skilling, Peter. Forthcoming. “An untraced Buddhist verse inscription from (Pen)insular
Southeast Asia ”, in D. Christian Lammerts (ed.), Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern
and Early Modern Southeast Asia . Singapore.
Skorupski, Tadeusz. 1983. The Sarvadurgatipari śodhana Tantra. Elimination of All Evil
Destinies. Sanskrit and Tibetan texts with Introduction, Translation and Notes . Delhi.
Soekmono, R. 1955. “Kisah perjalanan ke Sumatra Selatan dan Jambi ”,Amerta 3 (rep-
rinted 1985: the cited page numbers are those of this reprint).
Soekmono, R. 1962. Dinas Purbakala, Departemen P.P dan K. Laporan Tahunan 1954 .
Jakarta.
Soekmono, R. 1995. The Javanese Candi. Function and Meaning . Leiden.
Straaten, J.C. van der and A.N.J.Th. à Th. v.d. Hoop. 1960. Review of Funke 1958.
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 116/2: 280 –87.WRITTEN TRACES OF THE BUDDHIST PAST 193

--- [Page 60] ---
Strauch, Ingo. 2009. “Two stamps with the Bodhigarbh ālam ̇kāralaks ̣ad h āran ̣īfrom
Afghanistan and some further remarks on the classification of objects with the
ye dharm āformula ”, in Gerd J.R. Mevissen and Arundhati Banerji (eds),
Prajñ ādhara, Essays on Asian Art, History, Epigraphy and Culture in Honour of
Gouriswar Bhattacharya . New Delhi, 37 –56.
Stutterheim, W.F. 1929. Oudheden van Bali I: het oude rijk van Pedjeng. Tekst .
Singaradja.
Stutterheim, W.F. 1931. “Nog eens de kleizegels van Pedjeng ”,Mededelingen van de
Kirtya Liefrinck-van der Tuuk 3: 55 –6.
Stutterheim, W.F. 1932. “Van een tjan ̣d ̣i, een grottempel en een oorkonde ”,Djåwå 12:
292–303.
Stutterheim, W.F. 1935. “Een derde spreuk op de kleizegels van Pedjeng ”,
Mededelingen van de Kirtya Liefrinck-van der Tuuk 4: 87 –90.
Sundberg, Jeffrey Roger. 2003. “A Buddhist mantra recovered from the Ratu Baka
Plateau. A preliminary study of its implications for Śailendra-era Java ”,Bijdragen
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 159: 163 –88.
Taish ō=Taish ōshinsh ūdaizōkyō, 1924 –35. Edited and compiled by Takakusu Junjir ō,
Watanabe Kaigyoku and Ono Genmy ō. 100 vols. Tokyo: Taish ōissaiky ōkank ōkai.
Takahashi, Hisao. 1988. “Kong ōkai daimandara giki issai kong ōshutsugen: yoteki
(English title: A supplement of Vajradh ātumah āman ̣d ̣alopāyika-sarvavajrodaya) ”,
Buzan Gakuh ō33: 131(1) –81(58).
Tanemura, Ryugen. 2004. Kuladatta ’s Kriy āsam ̇grahapañjik ā. A Critical Edition and
Annotated Translation of Selected Sections . Groningen.
Titi Surti Nastiti. Forthcoming. “Corpus of watu s īmaInscriptions ”, to appear in a vol-
ume on Southeast Asian Epigraphy edited by D. Perret.
Vaidya, P.L. 1961. Mah āyāna-S ūtra-Sam ̇graha , part I. Darbhanga.
De la Vallée Poussin, Louis. 1896. Études et textes tantriques. Pañcakrama . Gand and
Louvain.
De la Vallée Poussin, Louis. 1903 –13.Mūlamadhyamakak ārikās( M ādhyamikas ūtra) de
Nāgārjuna avec la Prasannapad āCommentaire de Candrak īrti. St. Petersburg.
Watanabe, Kaikioku. 1912. Die Bhadracar ī. Eine Probe buddhistich-religiöser Lyrik
untersucht und herausgegeben . Dissertation, Leipzig.
Wogihara, Unrai. 1930 –36.Bodhisattvabh ūmi. A Statement of Whole Course of the
Bodhisattva (being fifteenth section of Yog ācārabh ūmi). Tokyo.
Wolters, O.W. 1967. Early Indonesian Commerce. A Study of the Origins of Śrīvijaya .
Ithaca and London.194 ARLO GRIFFITHS