--- [Page 1] ---
© Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, 2015 BEB , vol. I
Also available online – www.brillor ritual utensils; copying texts of the dhamma or 
representing them in art; and sponsoring ordina-
tions. A donative inscription might amount to noth-
ing more than the name of a donor etched on the 
base of a Buddha image, or run to hundreds of lines 
inscribed across the front and back of multiple mas-
sive stone slabs.
The motivations for such meritorious acts of 
giving are many, and often find explicit mention 
in lengthier donative inscriptions. Among other 
things, stated motivations include wishes for bud-
dhahood, the opportunity to take a bodhisatta vow, 
nibbāna at the time of the next Buddha Metteyya, 
prosperity and happiness in this life or the next, 
the protection and prolongation of the teachings 
of the Buddha, and the sharing of merit with living 
or deceased persons or deities. Several formulaic 
components are characteristic of lengthier donative 
inscriptions:
1. the date of the work of merit;
2. the name(s) of the donor(s);
3. the name(s) of the recipient(s) of the gift;
4. a list of the property transferred;
5. the motivation for the gift; and
6.  an admonition warning others against nullify-
ing or injuring the gift.
As some examples discussed below show, occasion-
ally donative inscriptions incorporate citations, 
eulogies to the donor ( praśasti), and words of praise 
for the Buddha, dhamma, or sa ṅgha.
During the premodern period, the purpose of 
donative inscriptions was not primarily commemo-
rative. They were legal documents that testi fied to 
the legitimate ownership of property. Inscriptions 
were cited in tax surveys to establish the owners 
and boundaries of land, and invoked in court cases 
as evidence of the property belonging to a particu-
lar monastic community. Some inscriptions record 
protracted legal battles over property, with layper-
sons accusing monks of falsely claiming ownership 
over lands that had never been donated to them 
(Than Tun, 1998), or factions within a family disput-
ing who had the right to give property to a monas-
tic community and thereby accrue merit (Frasch, 
1996). Because of the continued legal importance 
of inscriptions, authorities occasionally reinscribed Most Buddhist inscriptions in Southeast Asia may 
be assigned to one of three general analytical cat-
egories. They may be classi fied as citation inscrip-
tions, caption inscriptions, or donative inscriptions; 
however, there are also less common types of epig-
raphy (see p. 994 on siddhayātra inscriptions) that 
elude this tripartite schematization.
Epigraphs of the first type are  so-called because 
they inscribe text for which parallels can often be 
traced in Buddhist scripture. The paradigmatic 
example is the inscription of the ye dhamm ā 
(Pal.) / ye dharm āḥ (Skt.) stanza, an encapsula-
tion of the teaching of “conditioned arising” (Pal. 
paṭiccasamupp āda; Skt. pratītyasamutp āda), which 
is found in di fferent recensions in a wide range of 
Pali, other Middle Indo-Aryan, and Sanskrit liter-
ary sources (Skilling, 1999; 2003–2004). While we 
follow scholarly convention in referring to such 
epigraphs as citation inscriptions, in most cases it 
is not possible to determine with certainty whether 
such inscriptions were in fact cited from a particular 
source text, recalled from memory, or if they were 
transmitted independently of any perceived scrip-
tural basis. And indeed there is at least one major 
corpus of citation inscriptions from early Southeast 
Asia (see p. 994 on the ajñānāc cīyate  verse) for 
which there is no textual parallel in the Buddhist 
literature that has come down to us (Skilling, 2015). 
Citation inscriptions were and still are produced by 
Buddhists across the region as embodiments of the 
dhamma and objects of veneration and ritual. We 
include in this category also inscribed mantras and 
 so-called bīja (seed) syllables.
Caption inscriptions comprise epigraphic glosses 
that accompany iconographic representations of 
narratives drawn from Buddhist texts, such as a 
life of a buddha or a jātaka  (tale of a former life of 
a buddha).
Donative inscriptions were and still are pro-
duced, and often publicly established and displayed, 
to document a work of merit consisting of a gift 
(dāna) made to support and perpetuate the institu-
tions and teachings of Buddhism. Such gifts include 
building, repairing, and adorning monasteries and 
shrines; o ffering lands, livestock, and labor for the 
upkeep of a monastic community; creating images Epigraphy: Southeast Asia

--- [Page 2] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  989
damaged ones onto new stone or copperplate or 
copied them onto  palm-leaf or paper manuscripts. 
An example of the former is a countrywide cadas-
tral audit initiated by the Burmese king Badon in 
the late 18th century that involved recopying stones 
and archiving of hundreds of original and recopied 
inscriptions in and around the capital city (Taw 
Sein Ko, 1897; 1913; for updated readings of selected 
inscriptions, see Manta le ḥ mahāmuni ta ṃ tuiṅḥ 
atvaṅḥ rhi kyok c ā myāḥ). For copying onto cop-
perplates, see, for instance, the case of the Old Java-
nese Wanua Tengah III inscription (mentioned on  
p. 995), which incorporates a copy of a prior Sanskrit 
edict, and the Old Javanese K āñcana and Śobhāmṛta 
inscriptions, which pretend to be integral recopies 
of documents centuries older (Sarkar, 1971–72, no. 
22; Titi Surti Nastiti, 2007).
While in some parts of Southeast Asia, Buddhism 
has enjoyed nearly exclusive patronage from the 
state throughout history, and in some others its 
success as an institutionalized religion has waxed 
and waned in competition notably with ( Śaiva) 
Hinduism, there are also certain regions – although 
not many – where it has never played more than 
a marginal role. De fining what constitutes a Bud-
dhist inscription is dependent, among other factors, 
on the overall social status of Buddhism in a given 
area. Throughout history, any inscription from 
Burma, for instance, can be considered Buddhist by 
default; the island of Sumatra, before Islamization, 
has hardly yielded any explicitly  non-Buddhist epi-
graphs, and so in case of doubt, any inscription will 
have to be considered Buddhist. In other areas, we 
must depend on textual content or archaeological 
context to determine whether an inscription may 
be called Buddhist. In this connection, it is useful to 
keep in mind that ostensibly conclusive keywords 
such as bhikṣusaṃgha and vih āra may in certain 
cases denote Śaiva ascetics and monasteries, and 
that inscriptions may not be designated as Buddhist 
on the sole grounds of occurrence of such terms 
(on bhikṣusaṃgha in a Śaiva Sanskrit inscription of 
 8th-century Java, see Gri ffiths, forthcoming a; on the 
occurrence of vih āra in Śaiva epigraphical context 
in Camp ā, see Gri ffiths et al ., 2012, 236).
Geographical and Chronological 
Overview
Buddhist epigraphy covers almost the whole of 
the area that is known, in current geopolitical and academic parlance, as Southeast Asia. Not a single 
member state of the Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (with the possible exception of Singapore) 
is not home to a number of Buddhist inscriptions. 
Present borders are only partly a useful guide in the 
classification of Buddhist inscriptions: some regions 
now considered part of Southeast Asia might for the 
purposes of treating Buddhist epigraphy equally 
well be classi fied as belonging to South or East 
Asia; all of maritime Southeast Asia – the current 
states of Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei, 
and the Philippines – can usefully be considered a 
 cultural-historical unit (which we will call Nusan-
tara), as can Laos together with Thailand; current 
Vietnam must be viewed as comprising at least two 
historical entities, Camp ā and Đại Việt (the latter 
not taken into account in this entry); the epigraphi-
cal heritage of the Khmers stretches far beyond 
today’s borders of Cambodia.
The oldest Buddhist inscription from Southeast 
Asia, if not the oldest inscription from Southeast 
Asia tout court , is found on a small number of clay 
objects stamped with the Pali or Prakrit inscription 
saṃghasiri , found during the excavation of a mound 
at the Beikthano archaeological site in  lower-central 
Burma, provisionally dated to the 2nd century ce 
(Aung Thaw, 1968). These may, however, have been 
imported from the Indian subcontinent.
The chronology of the earliest positively local 
Buddhist inscriptions is problematic throughout 
the region, but certainly by the 6th century ce, a 
culture of production of Buddhist inscriptions was 
well established in several areas. This culture died 
out centuries ago in all of Nusantara, but lives on 
into the present in large parts of the Southeast Asian 
mainland.
Scripts and Languages
With the exception of those parts of Vietnam where 
the use of Chinese characters was the norm, all 
other Buddhist cultures of Southeast Asia (includ-
ing Camp ā in what is now Vietnam) have exclu-
sively used script types that are directly or indirectly 
adopted from South Asia. The classi fication of and 
nomenclature for premodern Indic scripts in South-
east Asia is a notorious problem (comp. Sander, 
2007), and hardly any sophisticated research cross-
ing the boundaries of present nation states has been 
undertaken in this field. Many publications on early 
Southeast Asian inscriptions use the term “Pallava” 

--- [Page 3] ---
990 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
script. This name refers to the Pallava dynasty, 
which came to power on the southeast coast of India 
around 300 ce. Early  20th-century scholars attrib-
uted to this dynasty the dissemination of cultural fea -
tures – such as the use of Sanskrit and production of 
Hindu and Buddhist statuary – from India to South-
east Asia. But there is virtually no direct evidence of 
any Pallava involvement, certainly not for the earli-
est centuries, and the Pallavas were by no means the 
only southern Indian kings to use this script during 
the early 1st millennium. Moreover, the inscriptions 
of other dynasties show a form of writing that looks 
just as much like the script used in Southeast Asia as 
does the script seen in Pallava inscriptions. Several 
inscriptions from Burma, Thailand, and Malaysia 
employ this script in Buddhist contexts, in Pali cita-
tion inscriptions, whereas the Pallava dynasty was 
never an important patron of Buddhism. For these 
reasons, among others, it is preferable to use more 
neutral terms – for instance, Late Southern Brahmi –  
to describe the form of writing found in most Bud-
dhist inscriptions of Southeast Asia before about 
700 ce. After this period, Late Southern Brahmi 
developed in separate directions in various regions 
of Southeast Asia, creating, for example, the “Kawi” 
script of Java (de Casparis, 1975), seen in caption 
inscriptions on Borobudur probably dating to the 
8th century, which is the antecedent of modern 
Javanese and Balinese scripts. In the same way, the 
modern scripts of mainland Southeast Asia (notably 
 Mon-Burmese, Khmer and Thai; see e.g. Antelme, 
2007) also descend ultimately from Late Southern 
Brahmi.
Indic writing was received in Southeast Asia in 
more than one wave, and certain areas during cer-
tain periods were strongly in fluenced by northeast-
ern Indian Buddhist culture. In those areas, we find 
scripts derived from Northern Brahmi, namely, Late 
Northern Brahmi (roughly 6th–7th cents.; found in 
Arakan and at Śrīkṣetra, both Burma) and the Sid-
dhamatrika script (in the 8th and 9th cents.; par-
ticularly on Java and Bali; see Gri ffiths et al ., 2013; 
Griffiths, 2014a), from the dominion of the Palas, who 
ruled a large area of northeastern India from about 
the  mid-8th century onward. Later we find instances 
of Nagari script proper, in Burma (see p. 992) as well 
as Nusantara (de Casparis, 1982; Gri ffiths, 2014b).
One particular script seems to show features 
of both northern and southern Indic writing: this 
 so-called Pyu script, known only from a small 
number of inscriptions found at Pyu sites within 
the Irrawaddy River valley of central Burma, still 
requires detailed study in order for it to be classi fied. The same script is involved in the rare phenomenon 
of digraphy – that is, the use of more than one script 
in a single inscription. One can find combinations of 
Pyu script, used to write the Pyu language – which 
is not yet well understood, but is apparently a mem-
ber of the  Tibeto-Burman language family – with 
Late Southern Brahmi to write Pali or Late Northern 
Brahmi to write Sanskrit. This last example simul-
taneously illustrates the fact that, in general, the 
northern scripts, when used in Southeast Asia, show 
a strong association with Buddhism and Sanskrit 
(de Casparis, 1982), whereas Late Southern Brahmi 
and its descendant scripts are not so specialized in 
terms of religious a ffiliation and are used to write a 
far more diverse range of languages. Two generaliza-
tions are possible with regard to the Pali language: it 
is in Southeast Asia never written in a northern Indic 
script, and it always indicates a Buddhist context.
There are very rare examples of the use of the 
later South Indian scripts Tamil and Grantha, and a 
single epigraph written in the northern Bhaikshuki 
script (Dimitrov, 2010).
Materials and Object Types
The favored material for large inscriptions has, 
throughout history, been stone. Stone inscriptions 
are in the vast majority of cases documents intended 
to be public and, hence, to be read. In mainland 
Southeast Asia, sandstone of excellent quality for 
manufacture of inscriptions is widely available. In 
Nusantara, the quality of available stone (in most 
cases andesite) tends to be lower, and consequently 
ancient stone inscriptions from the archipelago are 
often considerably more challenging to decipher 
than are contemporary inscriptions from the main-
land. The favored format for stone inscriptions is the 
stela, that is, a slab of stone intended to stand upright 
on a tenon, without necessary structural integra-
tion into a larger architectural context (such as a 
temple), generally inscribed at least on its two large 
faces, often also bearing text on smaller faces at the 
top and sides. Architectural elements in stone, such 
as doorjambs and lintels, are also often inscribed, as 
are stone cult images, relief slabs applied to walls of 
monuments, and so on.
Inscriptions were and still are also commonly 
engraved on metal supports, predominantly in cop-
per/bronze, silver, and gold. Inscriptions engraved 
on metal supports may be for public readership, 
but certain types of metal inscriptions were clearly  
not meant to be read, serving only ritual purposes.  

--- [Page 4] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  991
The medium of the copperplate, well known in 
Indian epigraphy for recording land transactions, 
was widely used in Southeast Asia only in Nusan-
tara (on Bali, Java and Luzon) – singular excep-
tions known from Arakan (Sircar, 1967), from the 
Haṃsavatī kingdom in lower Burma (Pan Hla & Guil-
lon, 1972) and from U Thong in Thailand (Cœdès, 
1958; this inscription is not Buddhist) con firm the 
rule. Throughout Southeast Asia, foils or leaves 
made of precious metals were inscribed with Bud-
dhist texts and worn as amulets or installed in mon-
uments or images at the time of their consecration. 
Ritual utensils also bear inscriptions; bronze bells 
stand out in Burma for being very often endowed 
with donative inscriptions but are scarcely found, 
or even absent, as an epigraphic medium in other 
parts of Southeast Asia. Elsewhere, inscribed ritual 
utensils are somewhat rare, but a substantial num-
ber of explicitly Buddhist examples are known 
from ancient Cambodia (Estève & Vincent, 2010; 
Griffiths & Vincent, 2014). Although inscribed (sig-
net) rings are not uncommon, only very few of  
the preserved examples can be connected with 
Buddhism (Malleret, vol. III, 1959–1960, 111; no. 916 
saṅghapauttasya ). A very widely attested type of 
metal support for inscriptions is, finally, the sculp-
tured cult image itself.
The third important material used as epigraphic 
support is clay, whether left unbaked or baked to 
become terracotta. Most instances of the use of this 
material do not serve purposes of public expression. 
Clay/terracotta is the favored material in Buddhist 
contexts for the mass reproduction of Buddhist texts 
and images as part of ritual practices. The technique 
of applying text is that of stamping onto an object, 
engraving into a mold, or inscribing the clay directly. 
Such inscriptions are found in great numbers, 
throughout Southeast Asia, on  so-called votive tab-
lets or sealings (see pp. 992–996, 1002–1003) bear-
ing molded images. The practice of stamping texts 
onto small semispherical lumps of clay and insert-
ing those into small clay st ūpas seems to have been 
limited to Nusantara, where we also find clay st ūpas 
directly stamped with the same texts (Issatriadi, 
1976–1977). The engraving of caption inscriptions 
into clay plaques with narrative reliefs – an instance 
of the public use of this kind of material support – is 
apparently limited to Burma (see p. 1002).
The  last-mentioned type of inscription may be 
compared with the application of ink narrative 
captions, donative statements, horoscopes, and 
perhaps in some cases gra ffiti onto plaster layers. 
This practice is extensively attested at Pagan and 
in later Burmese temples and also – though very poorly preserved – in several Buddhist sanctuaries 
of Central Java (de Casparis, 1958, 7, 13). A special 
type of  yellow-beige pyrophyllite, known as andagū 
in Burmese, was used for the carving of rather small 
images, rarely exceeding 30 cm, many of which  
bear inscriptions ( Bautze-Picron, 2006). Other 
materials used as epigraphic support are ivory and 
wood, but we know no examples older than a few 
centuries.
Inscriptions in Sanskrit
Inscriptions in Sanskrit no doubt form the most 
diverse linguistic subgroup within the corpus of 
Southeast Asian Buddhist epigraphy. They are rep-
resented in all  present-day countries (except Singa-
pore), found in bilingual combination with most 
languages of vernacular epigraphy, and illustrate 
a greater typological diversity of Buddhist inscrip-
tions than one might find in any other individual 
language of Southeast Asia, past or present.
The spread of Sanskrit in Southeast Asia is con-
comitant to the general spread of Indic cultural 
features in the region. All early inscriptions of 
Southeast Asia are undated, and determining the 
earliest Buddhist examples depends on – notori-
ously treacherous and imprecise – paleographic 
arguments. Although current scholarship assigns 
somewhat earlier dates to the oldest Pali inscrip-
tions of Burma (see p. 996) than it does to the earliest  
Buddhist inscriptions in Sanskrit, we would not 
wish to exclude the possibility that one or more of 
the Sanskrit inscriptions discussed below are in fact 
earlier than, or contemporary to, them. Sanskrit was 
only very rarely inscribed in central Burma but else-
where has known phases of signi ficant or even exclu-
sive use in epigraphic practice. The general trend 
has been for its use to give way to that of vernacular 
languages, although it never went out of fashion in 
Cambodia throughout the  so-called  pre-Angkorian 
and Angkorian periods ( 6th–13th cents.); in Nusan-
tara, where Sanskrit has never known a long phase 
of predominant usage, continuous exchange with 
South Asia seems to be one reason behind the resur-
facing of Sanskrit as an epigraphic language at vari-
ous brief periods in di fferent regions.
Arakan
Among the earliest Sanskrit inscriptions of  
Buddhist Southeast Asia are no doubt some that 
were found in Arakan. The Arakan tradition of San-
skrit epigraphy is limited chronologically to roughly 
the second half of the 1st millennium ce and forms 

--- [Page 5] ---
992 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
only the first chapter of the epigraphic history of 
Arakan. After a gap of several centuries without 
any local epigraphic production, an Arakanese ver-
nacular tradition starts in about the 14th century 
and forms the second chapter of this history (see 
pp. 1002–1003). The majority of the relevant items 
have been found around the major early urban site 
of Vesālī. The total number of Sanskrit inscriptions 
so far recorded is about two dozen (Johnston, 1944; 
Gutman, 1976; Gri ffiths, forthcoming d). The corpus 
includes several ye dharm āḥ stanza citations (Kyaw 
Minn Htin, 2011), besides some short and some 
(very) extensive donative inscriptions, including the 
aforementioned copperplate charter.
Central Burma
On the whole, the Sanskrit epigraphical record of 
Burma is not well served by publications and some 
pioneer work remains to be done. We are aware of 
only four inscriptions wholly or substantially com-
posed in Sanskrit found in what is today central 
Burma:
1. the bilingual and digraphic  Sanskrit-Pyu 
inscription – whose partly damaged text does not 
evidently permit classi fication among any of our 
categories – engraved on the base of a stone Bud-
dha image at the Śrīkṣetra Museum (Pyay, Burma), 
comprising eight stanzas in vaṃśasthavila  meter 
interspersed with Pyu glosses (Luce, vol. I, 1985, 
65, 65n22, 132; vol. II, 1985, pl. 16–17; Gri ffiths et al ., 
forthcoming);
2. the fragments of a monolingual Sanskrit 
inscription, engraved in a form of Late Northern 
Brahmi, said to have been found at Śrīkṣetra but of 
which no trace is to be found there nowadays (see 
Sircar, 1976, 210–217; another fragment whose dis-
covery was reported in the ASB , 1960, 22 [ fig. 13] may 
well belong to this same inscription);
3. a ruined inscription held in a small shed near 
the Tharaba gate at Pagan, in a form of early Nagari 
or  proto-Bengali script, almost entirely illegible; and
4. the recently discovered Sawlu inscription 
from Myittha, which at the top of the side also bear-
ing Pali and Pyu texts, reveals the extremely dam-
aged remains of a Sanskrit portion too, again in such 
a north(east) Indian script. 
Some small artifacts, such as rings and intaglios, 
bear short legends in the form of Sanskrit words or 
names; notable are several instances of intaglios 
bearing the Sanskrit (or Pali) compound dayādānaṃ 
(gift out of compassion; Aung Thaw, 1972, 14).
From the early 2nd millennium ce, there is also 
the evidence of the numerous sealings dated to the reigns of Aniruddha (r. c. 1044–1077) and his imme-
diate successors, some of which carry short Sanskrit 
or Palicized Sanskrit donative statements or cita-
tions, frequently of the ye dharm āḥ stanza, stamped 
in Nagari script into the clay. In addition, there are 
a few instances in which donative inscriptions con-
tain short Sanskrit passages in the  Mon-Burmese 
script, usually recording astronomical data, such as 
in the final several lines of the monumental Shwegu-
gyi Inscription (1131 ce; Pe Maung Tin & Luce, 1960). 
During this period Sanskrit is also, though rarely, 
found written in Burmese script in brief invocatory 
phrases that begin inscriptions (otherwise written 
in Pali). The most common of such usages is the San-
skrit word śrī, found nine times among the earliest 
Burmese vernacular inscriptions dated to the 12th 
century, and several variations on namo sarvajñ āya 
(e.g. namo sarbbajaññ āya; “hail to the omniscient 
[Buddha]!”).
The Khmer Cultural Sphere
The epigraphical record of ancient Cambodia, cov-
ering all of present Cambodia and large portions of 
what are now Thailand, Laos, and Vietnam, is com-
paratively well served by the monumental series of 
Inscriptions du Cambodge  by G. Cœdès (1937–1966); 
in volume VIII, he published an inventory of about 
1000 inscriptions that assigns a K. (for Khmer) 
number to and lists the bibliography for each item. 
Since then, the inventory has been carried forward 
(Jacques, 1971; see also Gerschheimer, 2003–2004) 
and further volumes of inscriptions have been pub-
lished (Pou, 1989; 2001; 2011).
A tradition of use of Sanskrit for Buddhist inscrip-
tions in the Khmer cultural sphere is attested from 
the 6th–7th centuries onward down to the 14th cen-
tury (see Harris, 2005: ch. 1, app. A and B), that is, 
during the  pre-Angkorian and Angkorian periods. 
Two early Sanskrit inscriptions (K. 40; K. 604) sug-
gest a signi ficant role of Brahmans in the earliest 
history of Buddhism, as is also observed in the Wat 
Maheyong inscription of Thailand (see p. 994). In 
terms of royal patronage, and hence in terms of the 
epigraphic record, Buddhism generally remained 
in the shadow of Śaivism during the 1st millennium 
ce, and Buddhist Sanskrit inscriptions are therefore 
relatively rare (Sanderson, 2003–2004, 424–433). 
Many scholars have assumed a phenomenon of 
syncretism between Buddhism and other religions 
of Indian origin, as well as local religious traditions, 
again relying heavily on epigraphic evidence, but t he 
notion of syncretism is problematic (Estève, 2009). 

--- [Page 6] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  993
The Buddhist Sanskrit inscriptions that we have 
almost exclusively record works of merit (donation, 
foundation), following the general pattern typical 
of Cambodian Sanskrit epigraphy in their textual 
structure, always engraved on stone and always 
entirely composed in verse form respecting the 
standards of the kāvya genre, entailing inclusion of 
a quantity of praise poetry ( praśasti) directed at one 
or more deities as well as the issuing authority (usu-
ally the king) that often overshadows the record of 
the work of merit, which it is the basic raison d’être  
of the inscription to record. Many such inscriptions 
are accompanied (almost always: concluded) by 
business portions in Old Khmer.
During the reigns of Jayavarman V (r. 968/969–
1000) and Jayavarman VII (r. 1182/1183–c. 1220), 
two kings who were particularly favorable to Bud-
dhism, we witness an e fflorescence of Buddhist 
Sanskrit epigraphy, including some of the most 
poetically impressive and historically informa-
tive Sanskrit inscriptions of Cambodia, that of Vat 
Sithor (K. 111; Sharrock, 2012), the group of Sanskrit 
and Khmer inscriptions of Bat Chum (K. 266–268; 
Mertens, 2005), and the enormous Buddhist dona-
tions recorded in the stelae of Ta Prohm (K. 273) and 
Preah Khan (K. 908). A recently discovered and still 
unpublished Sanskrit inscription (K. 1297) reveals 
the kings Jayavarman VI (r. 1080/1081–1107/1108) and 
Tribhuvan ādityavarman (r. 1169–1177), about whom 
very little was known so far, to have been important 
supporters of Buddhism as well (Gri ffiths & Vincent, 
2014); it focuses on donations at the apparently very 
important, though still unidenti fied, site named 
Vaṃśā rāma in the Sanskrit inscriptions, Chp ār 
Ransī in Khmer (Estève, 2009, 446–475).
Many scholars have invoked epigraphical evi-
dence in an e ffort to trace the history of Therav āda/
Śrāvakayāna in Cambodia, but the arguments are 
rarely conclusive (Harris, 2005, ch. 1) and generally 
rely on inscriptions in Khmer or Pali. It is Sanskrit 
inscriptions that tend to be invoked with regard 
to the question of earliest epigraphic attestations 
of Mahāyāna and Mantranaya (tantric) Buddhism 
(Woodward, 2004; Green, 2014); of particular inter-
est in this connection is the unique prastāra (alpha-
bet diagram) inscription from Bat Chum (K. 948; 
Cœdès, 1952b; Woodward, 2009).
Campā
The corpus of inscriptions of Camp ā spans from 
about the 5th to the 15th century. The inventory of 
these inscriptions, initiated, like that for the Khmer 
corpus, by G. Cœdès (Cœdès & Parmentier, 1923) and still maintained by the École française d’ Extrême-
Orient (Gri ffiths et al ., 2008–2009) covers about 240 
inscriptions (each with a C. number), only a small 
percentage of which is Buddhist, the most impor-
tant ones of these (in size) being in Sanskrit, some 
others in vernacular Cam (see p. 1001). Most of the 
published Camp ā inscriptions are readily available 
in one handy volume which makes available in Eng-
lish translation all  French-language publications 
that had appeared before 2004 (Golzio, 2004). Since 
then, important publications include The Inscrip-
tions of Camp ā in the Museum of Cham Sculpture at 
Đà Nẵng (Griffiths et al ., 2012; see also the website of 
the Corpus of the Inscriptions of Camp ā).
In Camp ā, as in ancient Cambodia, Śaivism was 
on the whole the dominant religion, and the fact 
that Buddhist inscriptions form a minority re flects 
this. Several authors have compiled surveys of Bud-
dhism in ancient Camp ā, all relying partly or prin-
cipally on inscriptions (Mabbett, 1986; Chutiwongs, 
2005; Schweyer, 2009). The Buddhist inscriptions 
of Camp ā are very comparable in their physical 
appearance and contents to those of Cambodia; 
they are always engraved on stone and always com-
posed in verse form (e.g. C. 66). Some of them are 
concluded by a business portion in Old Cam. Their 
distribution on the map of Camp ā is relatively even, 
although a certain concentration is notable in the 
9th and 10th centuries in what are now Qu ảng 
Nam, Th ừa  Thiên-Hu ế, Quảng Trị, and Qu ảng Bình 
provinces. The Buddhism of ancient Camp ā was 
quite clearly part of the Mah āyāna/Mantranaya 
complex, with possible evidence of in fluence of 
the Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra (Woodward, 2011). Absent 
from the mentioned overviews are some relatively 
early (c. 7th cent.?) ye dharm āḥ inscriptions (C. 46; 
C. 134) from Phú Yên and Qu ảng Nam provinces 
respectively, the former recorded to have been 
engraved on a molded tablet. A comparably early 
stela with image of a Buddha, recently discovered 
also in Phú Yên, is engraved two times with the ye 
dharmāḥ stanza, to which is added a statement of 
the “four truths of the noble” (Skilling et al ., 2010); 
two fragmentary molded tablets, on whose backs 
the ye dharm āḥ stanza is written in script that sug-
gests a dating to the 9th century, were also found 
in Phú Yên (Skilling, 2003–2004; Skilling et al ., 
2010). A  10th-century donative Sanskrit inscription  
(C. 167) relevant to the history of Buddhism remains 
unpublished.

--- [Page 7] ---
994 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
Laos and Central Thailand
No early Buddhist inscriptions in Sanskrit are 
known from Laos. What early Buddhist inscriptions 
there are, are in Mon. The use of Sanskrit was cer-
tainly not prominent in what is now central Thai-
land, in the predominantly  Mon-speaking polity 
that silver medallions and a stone inscription, dated 
on paleographic grounds to circa the 7th century ce, 
as well as later inscriptions and Chinese sources, call 
Dvāravatī (Boeles, 1964; Skilling, 2003; Revire, forth-
coming a). Despite their primary connection with 
Mon rather than Khmer culture, almost all of the 
 pre-Thai inscriptions of central Thailand have been 
included in the inventory of Cambodian inscrip-
tions (see p. 992), and hence bear K. numbers. The 
few early inscriptions found in central Thailand that 
include Sanskrit portions listed by N. Revire (2014) 
are mostly fragmentary. Some Sanskrit inscriptions 
found in this area are clearly Śaiva; in several cases, 
it seems that materials belong to the Khmer cul-
tural sphere rather than Dv āravatī or some other 
 non-Khmer kingdom.
Still, the existence of a modest Sanskrit epi-
graphic tradition in Buddhist circles of Dv āravatī is 
undeniable (K. 577). It cannot be excluded that the 
important, but very fragmentary, Wat Maheyong 
inscription (K. 407), commonly assumed to come 
from the peninsular province Nakhon Si Thamma-
rat, actually comes from a Dv āravatī site. Its script is 
virtually identical to that of the Dv āravatī Pali cita-
tion inscriptions (see p. 997) and records donations 
to the monastic community apparently in conjunc-
tion with Brahmans. 
Nusantara
The southern segment of the Malayan peninsula 
belongs culturally to island Southeast Asia (Nus-
antara). The number of inscriptions found on the 
mainland is on the whole very limited, but the few 
that have been found in what is today Southern 
Thailand and Western Malaysia are almost exclu-
sively Buddhist. Several specimens of Sanskrit ye 
dharmāḥ stanzas were found on the Thai side of the 
border (Skilling, 2003–2004), as were inscriptions 
citing the “four truths of the noble” (Revire, forth-
coming b). Most of the epigraphic material on the 
Malaysian side has been thoroughly documented 
by M.  Jacq-Hergoualc’h (1992; 2002). Among those 
of special interest are the two tablets found at sites 
in Kedah, thought to date to about the 7th century, 
that cite (one with one more verse than the other) 
the same passage from the Sāgaramatiparip ṛcchā, a 
text of whose Sanskrit transmission only quotations survive and which is integrally known solely from 
Chinese (T. 397, 400) and Tibetan (D 152/P 819) 
translations (Quaritch Wales, 1940; Chia & Andaya, 
2011, figs. 2.7–2.8).
Also from the same Kedah area are two rather 
small stone slabs, illustrated with the images of 
stūpas, around which are engraved the respec-
tive inscriptions. In the more recently discovered  
Sungai Mas inscription (Allen, 1986–1987), we find 
the ajñānāc cīyate  verse, apparently a scriptural cita-
tion found in several epigraphical instances through-
out Nusantara but one whose source text has not 
been identi fied (Skilling, forthcoming). In the more 
famous inscription of Buddhagupta (Chhabra, 1935), 
we find the same verse, but now combined with the  
phrase mahānāvikabuddhaguptasya raktam ṛittikavās- 
[tavyasya]  (“of the great  shipcaptain Buddhagupta, 
resident of Raktam ṛttika”) and sarvveṇa prakāreṇa 
sarvvasmin sarvvath ā sa[r]vva  . . . siddhay āt[r]ā[ḥ] 
santu  (“in all ways, everywhere and at all times 
may alluunisttệ.uunisttệ.uunisttệ.uunisttệobtain success in their travels”). We are 
inclined to interpret this inscription as an ex voto 
of said Buddhagupta, explicitly stated to originate 
from a place that may well be the same as that after 
which was named the Raktam ṛttikā Mahāvihāra in 
what is now Rajbadidanga, Murshidabad district, 
West Bengal, India (although problems with this 
interpretation remain; see Skilling, 2015). A sub-
stantial number of simpler texts containing in full-
est form the phrase jayasiddhay ātrasarvvasatv āḥ 
(“May all beings obtain victory and success in their 
travels!”) or shorter versions but minimally the word 
siddhayātra engraved on unprepared river stones 
have been found near Buddhist sanctuaries in South 
Sumatra and South Kalimantan (de Casparis, 1956, 
1–2; Suwedi Montana, 1990). We tentatively accept 
here the unpublished idea of P.-Y. Manguin (not 
shared by previous scholars) that these would also 
have been ex votos.
The Nusantara archipelago is richly endowed 
with a variety of molded clay tablets or sealings 
that are known in the secondary literature as votive 
tablets; recent scholarship has distanced itself from 
this term, based on the argument that such molded 
tablets “were not produced as a result of a vow but 
rather in ritual contexts in order to produce merit” 
(Skilling, 2005). If our understanding is correct 
that such clay tablets served a di fferent ritual pur-
pose than the siddhayātra stones, then we know of  
no other examples of ex voto inscriptions in the 
Buddhist world.
Molded clay tablets of the type discussed by  
P. Skilling, if they are inscribed, in the vast majority 

--- [Page 8] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  995
of Nusantaran cases bear the ye dharm āḥ stanza, 
which is also often applied onto other small clay 
artifacts (e.g. miniature st ūpas) by stamp (Gri ffiths, 
2011b); unique for Nusantara is its reduction to 
the mantra oṃ ye te sv āhā (Cruijsen et al ., 2012, 
91). Very rarely attested citations of other texts on 
clay sealings have been discussed by A. Gri ffiths 
(2014a). There is a possible case of citation of the 
Suvarṇabhāsottamas ūtra on a small stone tablet 
from Sumatra, resembling the aforementioned 
Sāgaramatiparip ṛcchā citation tablets from Kedah 
(Griffiths, 2011b); a large stone from Lampung bears 
the dhāraṇī of the Aparimit āyuḥsūtra, and citations 
of other Mah āyāna scriptures are found on a sub-
stantial corpus of metal foil inscriptions, apparently 
serving as consecration deposits for statues; some-
times they are directly engraved on metal statues, 
sometimes on substantial plates, perhaps intended 
as consecration deposits for st ūpas (Cruijsen et al ., 
2012; Orlina, 2012; Gri ffiths, 2014a). Besides citation 
of verses or dhāraṇīs from Mah āyāna scriptures, 
there is also a growing body of citations of mantras 
from tantric scriptures including the Hevajratantra  
(Sundberg, 2003; Gri ffiths et al ., 2013; Gri ffiths, 2014a). 
A unique case is the Mahāraudran āmahṛdaya , a 
dhāraṇī with close intertextual connections to the 
Sarvatath āgatatattvasa ṃgraha , engraved on a foil 
excavated near Borobudur and also transmitted 
on Bali, but not known from any other part of the  
Buddhist world (Gri ffiths, 2014c). Some textual mate -
rial from or related to the Sarvatath āgatatattva-
saṃgraha  is also found engraved on stone stakes 
(kīlaka ) apparently serving to demarcate ground 
plans of Buddhist monuments in central Java 
(Griffiths, 2014a). The aforementioned types of 
inscriptions often include one or more bīja man-
tras, but there are also several cases of sets of small 
gold foils engraved with individual bījas together 
intended to form maṇḍalas (Nihom, 1998; Gri ffiths, 
2014b).
Several instances of the category of caption 
inscriptions are known from Java (Candi Borobu-
dur and Candi Jago) and other islands (Batu Pahat 
in West Kalimantan; see Krom, vol. I, 1927, ch. 2; 
Brandes, 1904, app. I; Skilling, 2015). Due to lack of 
case endings, the identi fication of the language as 
Sanskrit cannot always be established with total cer-
tainty, as local languages have abundantly absorbed 
Sanskrit lexical material in stem forms. The inscrip-
tion of Pasir Panjang on Karimun Besar (in the Riau 
archipelago) seems to be at once a caption identi-
fying a pair of large natural indentations in a rocky 
outcrop as footprints of the Buddha and a memento of a figure calling himself Golapa ṇḍita (perhaps 
“Scholar from Gau ḍa”; Caldwell & Hazlewood, 1994).
We are able to treat here only in the most cursory 
manner what is, at least in terms of textual volume 
and richness as historical source material, the most 
important subclass of Nusantaran Buddhist Sanskrit 
inscriptions, namely those whose basic raison d’être  
is to record donations, installations of statues, and 
other such works of merit, in the literary form of the 
kāvya genre also current in Cambodia and Camp ā. 
Compared to those and other Buddhist epigraphic 
cultures, Buddhists of ancient Nusantara much 
more rarely opted for the production of bilingual 
inscriptions (one exception is the  Sanskrit-Old Java-
nese Kayumwungan stela included in Long, 2014), 
and indeed – with exceptions in speci fic areas and 
periods – on the whole much more rarely used San-
skrit for donative records to begin with.
No such records have come to light on Borneo/
Kalimantan, where epigraphic remains generally 
are very sparse; from Bali, which is rich in epigra-
phy and which has yielded several Buddhist citation 
inscriptions, not a single Buddhist donative inscrip-
tion in Sanskrit has been recorded either. In Suma-
tra, the early Buddhist kingdom of Śrīvijaya seems 
hardly to have issued Sanskrit donative inscrip-
tions, only two fragments of such documents being 
known so far (de Casparis, 1956, ch. 1 [fragments a, 
b]); in what is now Nakhon Si Thammarat province 
of Thailand, it has left the splendid Sanskrit praśasti 
known as the Ligor inscription of the late 8th cen-
tury (Long, 2014, ch. 1). Much later, in about the 13th 
century, one more Sanskrit donative inscription was 
issued in this region by a king called Candrabh ānu 
(Cœdès, 1918; 1992a;  Jacq-Hergoualc’h, 2002). Back 
on Sumatra, the only signi ficant group of Sanskrit 
donative inscriptions is that issued under the reign 
of Ādityavarman in West Sumatra in the 14th cen-
tury, which are extremely challenging both by the 
state of preservation of several items and by the 
extremely unorthodox register of Sanskrit that is 
employed in all of them. These have not yet been 
served by a comprehensive publication (see Kulke, 
2009; Kozok & van Reijn, 2010).
In the archipelago, Java has produced the greatest 
number of Buddhist Sanskrit donative inscriptions. 
The first substantial group is that issued, mostly in 
Siddhamatrika script and exclusively on stone, by 
the Sailendra dynasty in the 8th and 9th centuries, 
in Central Java (Long, 2014). A unique case is the 
Sanskrit inscription issued under King Garu ṅ in the 
early 9th century that is included wholesale in the 
 early-10th-century Wanua Tengah III copperplate 

--- [Page 9] ---
996 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
inscription of Balitu ṅ in Old Javanese (Wisseman 
Christie, 2001; Gri ffiths, 2011a; Boechari, 2012, ch. 32, 
no. 6).
Sanskrit inscriptions are altogether very rare in 
the East Javanese period, that is, from the 10th cen-
tury onward, but the few exceptions are almost all 
from Buddhist contexts (Bosch, 1919–21; Speijer, 
1903; 1904; Poerbatjaraka, 1922; Kozok & van Reijn, 
2010). All of them are engraved on stone or bronze 
statuary whose installation they record (and all but 
one are discussed in Reichle, 2007).
Inscriptions in Pali
Although Pali is a Middle  Indo-Aryan language 
that originated on the Indian subcontinent in the 
late 1st millennium bce, nearly all of the early epi-
graphic evidence of Pali comes not from India or Sri 
Lanka but from mainland Southeast Asia (comp. 
von Hinüber, 1985). Inscriptions in Pali begin circa 
the 5th century ce and are concentrated around the 
central Irrawaddy basin of  modern-day Burma and 
the Chao Phraya and Pasak basins of  modern-day 
Thailand, with a single 7th- or  8th-century example 
from Cambodia (Skilling, 2002). During this early 
period, epigraphic Pali is mainly used for inscrib-
ing textual citations. By the early 2nd millennium, 
Pali assumes a broader documentary function, and 
is used as a language for recording works of merit, a 
role formerly reserved for Sanskrit or vernaculars in 
these areas.
All  1st-millennium Pali inscriptions from South-
east Asia lack dates. Perhaps the earliest example 
of the dated inscription of Pali in the region is  
K. 997, which contains several verses paralleled in 
the Telakaṭāhagāthā and is otherwise in Khmer. 
Its date has been variously read as 761, 941, and 1061 
ce, but a date before the 10th century is extremely 
implausible (Revire, 2012). Dates have been assigned 
to undated Pali epigraphs on the basis of paleog-
raphy or archaeological context, but a complete 
analysis of the surviving corpus, in comparison with 
both regional and South Asian inscriptions, has yet 
to be undertaken (see Falk, 1997 for some South 
Asian comparisons). For this reason remarks con-
cerning early chronology should be understood as 
provisional.
Burma (1st Millennium ce)
A  mid-1st-millennium walled settlement called Śrīk - 
ṣetra, associated with the  Pyu-speaking culture,  
is located near the modern town of Pyay in central lower Burma. This Sanskritized name, gen-
erally used in scholarship, is perhaps first attested 
in a bronze seal whose authenticity and precise 
date require further scrutiny (Krüger & Letz, 2006), 
or otherwise in Mon epigraphy of the 11th and 12th 
centuries, in which it is also called “Sis īt” (Blagden, 
1920, 94, 135, 150), whereas in the 7th century, the 
Chinese monk Xuanzang referred to the site as Shili 
Chadaluo ( 室利差呾羅國 ; Wade, 2014). The earliest 
( 13th-cent.) name for the site in Burmese epigraphy 
is Sirikhyattr ā (Nyein Maung et al ., vol. I, 1972–2013, 
262), and it is typically referred to as Sirikhetta or 
Sarekhettar ā in later Pali and Burmese inscriptions 
and texts.
In 1897, two gold plates inscribed in Pali were 
discovered at Lebaw village seven miles south of 
Śrīkṣetra. Known as the Maunggan Gold Plates, and 
currently held at the British Library, the first of them 
begins with a citation of the ye dhamm ā stanza, par-
alleled in several locations in the Tipi ṭaka (see Vin 
i.40). This is followed by a sequence of 14 numbered 
lists of aspects of the Buddhist teaching that refer, 
for example, to the “four truths of the noble” ( cattāri 
ariyasacc āni) and the “ five eyes” ( pañcacakkh ūni) 
and “ten powers” of a buddha ( dasabalāni). The 
sequence is not a direct citation of any single text 
but rather a compilation of numbered lists found in 
multiple canonical sources. The second plate also 
begins with the ye dhamm ā stanza, and then lists the 
iti pi so  formula of the nine qualities of the Buddha 
and the svākkhato  formula of the six qualities of the 
dhamma  (see AN iii.285). The first editor of the text 
dated the plates to the 1st century (Tun Nyein, 1898); 
L. Finot (1912) provided a more realistic date of the 
5th century. On the basis of a reappraisal of the 
shape of certain letters, H. Falk (1997) has recently 
suggested a  6th-century date.
In 1926 the excavation of the Khin Ba mound 
situated within the wall of Śrīkṣetra unearthed the 
relic chamber of a ruined st ūpa, inside of which was 
discovered, among other Buddhist artifacts, a gold 
manuscript consisting of 20 folios of inscribed Pali 
text bound with covers and secured with a gold wire, 
as well as a number of fragmentary inscriptions on 
gold and silver plates and a silver reliquary inscribed 
in Pyu and Pali (Duroiselle, 1926). This golden manu-
script was first read in 1939 (Lu Pe Win, 1940), and 
has since probably received more scholarly atten-
tion than any other early Pali epigraphic document 
(Stargardt, 1995; 2000; Skilling, 2005b). It contains 
eight Pali citations traceable to various texts of the 
Tipiṭaka, including the Paṭisambhidh āmagga  and 
Dhammapada , and has been dated to the first half of 

--- [Page 10] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  997
the 5th century (Falk, 1997). A further inscribed gold 
plate bearing the iti pi so  formula was discovered 
shortly thereafter at Kyundawzu, also within the 
walls of Śrīkṣetra (Duroiselle, 1928), and has been 
dated to approximately the same period (Falk, 1997).
Other Pali citation inscriptions on metal, stone, 
and clay from Burma probably date to the latter half 
of the 1st millennium, although in most cases, the 
material has not been subjected to paleographic 
scrutiny. From Kunzeik, near the modern city of 
Bago (ancient Pegu), is a stone slab, apparently con-
temporary with the Khin Ba mound finds, inscribed 
with the formula of “conditioned arising” in the 
specific form used in the opening of the Vinaya 
Mahāvagga  (Luce, 1974; Skilling, 1997a). Many clay 
sealings inscribed in Pali (and vernacular Mon and 
Pyu) have been found at Śrīkṣetra and other sites 
in Burma (Mya, 1961). From Arakan in  modern-day 
western Burma, there are also  mid-1st century ye 
dhammā and other Pali inscriptions that await 
closer study ( ASB , 1959; 1960; 1965). An interesting 
set of inscriptions from Śrīkṣetra cites verses with 
parallels in the paritta corpus of Pali recitational, 
ritual, and protective texts (Aung Thaw, 1993; Skill-
ing, 1997b).
Thailand (1st Millennium ce)
Extensive early Pali epigraphic material is found 
also in neighboring central Thailand, connected 
with the Dv āravatī Kingdom (see p. 994). A recent 
survey notes 42 citation inscriptions, among which 
26 are of the ye dhamm ā stanza, datable between the 
7th and the 9th century ce (Revire, 2014). The con-
tent of these inscriptions is similar to the Burmese 
material in paralleling texts of the Pali Tipi ṭaka. 
Supports include stone, brick, and molded clay. 
Distinctive to this region are Pali citation inscrip-
tions on stone dharmacakra s, “wheels of the law,” 
and their supporting pillars/bases. Texts include 
excerpts concerning the four truths from the  
Dhammacakkappavattanasutta , excerpts from the 
Udāna, Suttanip āta, and Dhammapada , and the for-
mula of “conditioned arising” (Brown, 1996). It is also 
from central Thailand that we find the earliest Bud-
dha images inscribed in Pali (Skilling, 2003–2004).
The citation inscriptions mentioned here and in 
the previous section attest to the wide circulation 
and patronage of Pali literature in early Southeast 
Asia and to the fact that texts inscribed in Pali were 
regarded as ritual objects worthy of veneration in 
their own right. From the 11th century, however, 
Pali comes to be more widely used in donative inscriptions, as a language for documenting acts 
of merit and, often, to record the motivations for  
such acts.
Later Mainland Southeast Asia
Some of the earliest 2nd-millenium examples are 
Buddhist sealings inscribed in Pali and bearing 
names of donors, the kings Aniruddha and Sawlu of 
Pagan, which have been found across Burma, as far 
south as near Yangon and Myeik (Luce & Ba Shin, 
1969–1970; Skilling, 2008). Dated Pali lithic inscrip-
tions recording donations begin with R ājakumāra’s 
Myinkaba Kubyaukgyi inscription of circa 1113 
(Taw Sein Ko & Duroiselle, 1919) and the Shwegu-
gyi inscription of 1131 (Pe Maung Tin & Luce, 1960). 
The latter is a particularly impressive example of 
Pali poetry, consisting of one hundred verses that 
include several citations from the Tipi ṭaka and a 
condensed telling of the life of Gotama Buddha. The 
inscription also eulogizes the king, a feature found in 
other  2nd-millennium Pali inscriptions, such as one 
dated 1361 from Sukhothai that contains references 
to Pali scripture and commemorates the ordination 
of King L īdayya (Cœdès, vol. 1, 1924–1929, 111–116). 
A Pali inscription from Cambodia, long mistakenly 
regarded as the earliest from the country, also dates 
from around this period (1308 ce), and records the 
royal donation of a monastery along with villages 
and slaves ( dāsidāsa) for its upkeep (K. 754).
Perhaps the longest donative inscription in Pali 
was established by King Dhammacet ī in Bago in 
1476 to commemorate the royal reestablishment of 
a pure Vinaya lineage in R āmaññadesa (Taw Sein 
Ko, 1893). Known as the Kaly āṇī Sīmā inscription, 
and simultaneously produced also in a vernacular 
Mon version, it is one of the more historically sig-
nificant Pali inscriptions, as its narrative of the his-
tory of Buddhism in Southeast Asia and Buddhist 
exchanges with Sri Lanka was later translated into 
multiple vernaculars and transmitted in manuscript 
form, entering into di fferent regional chronicle 
(vaṃsa) traditions. Monolingual Pali inscriptions 
appear to be less common in Cambodia, Laos, and 
Northern Thailand, but a bilingual epigraph from 
Laos dated 1567 carries a long donative statement 
in Pali (Lorrillard, 2003a), and there are a number 
of Northern Thai Buddha images with citation and 
donative inscriptions in the language (Veidlinger, 
2007).
Later in the 2nd millennium, inscriptions of Pali 
texts continued to be produced. The most ambitious 
is the inscription of all the root texts of the Tipi ṭaka 

--- [Page 11] ---
998 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
on 729 stone stelae at the Kuthodaw Temple in Man-
dalay, sponsored by King Mindon between 1860 and 
1868. This was followed by a number of similar proj-
ects (the most recent in 1980), including one in 1913 
that resulted in the inscription of Pali commentarial 
and subcommentarial texts on 1772 stelae (Vicit-
tasiri & Kum ārābhivaṃsa, 2000; Bollée, 1968). In 
 19th-century Thailand the Dhammapada  and other 
Pali texts were inscribed at Phra Pathom Chedi in 
Nakhon Pathom (Skilling, 2000).
Southeast Asian Inscriptions in 
Chinese
If we limit our scope here to the period before the 
 large-scale immigration of Chinese populations 
into Southeast Asia and the consequent e fflores-
cence of a local Chinese epigraphic corpus, we must 
conclude that Chinese epigraphy is of almost neg-
ligible importance. A rather badly worn bilingual/
digraphic  Pyu-Chinese inscription dating to the 
13th century, found at Pagan, reveals no explicit 
connection with Buddhism (Chen  Yi-Sein, 1960). 
An inscription dated the 12th year of Ming emperor 
Wanli (1584–1585) from Bhamo (also in Burma), is 
not overtly Buddhist either (Duroiselle, 1929–1930). 
One or two molded tablets found at Si Thep show 
an explicitly Buddhist donor statement in Chi-
nese, coupled with a line in Indic writing that has 
not so far been deciphered (Skilling, 2009, 121). 
Several Buddhist sealings from the 1420s bearing 
short inscriptions in Chinese have been identi fied 
among the tens of thousands of sealings and frag-
ments thereof recovered from Wat Ratchaburana in 
Ayutthaya. Each begins with the words “Great Ming” 
(Da Ming; 大明 ), followed by the donor’s name and a 
brief donative expression. At least one of the names 
inscribed appears to include a Chinese surname and 
 non-Chinese personal name (Wade, 2000).
Southeast Asian Inscriptions in Tamil
Although Tamil inscriptions are not unknown in 
the strongholds of Buddhism that were Thailand 
and Burma (Francis, 2008–2009, 412), the only Tamil 
inscription from a Buddhist context known to us is 
the bilingual and digraphic  Malay-Tamil Rokan 
inscription of 1261 from North Sumatra, recording a 
royal work of merit (Gri ffiths, 2014b).Southeast Asian Inscriptions in 
Prakrit
The label Prakrit is occasionally applied by scholar-
ship on Southeast Asian epigraphy rather loosely, or 
at least without a clear indication of the intended 
referent, simply to designate the language of inscrip-
tions that display Middle Indo-Aryan features yet 
do not easily agree with standard Pali. In certain 
instances the designations Hybrid Pali, Sanskritized 
Pali, or simply incorrect Sanskrit might be more 
appropriate. In any event, the corpus of inscriptions 
from Southeast Asia that might plausibly be clas-
sified as containing a Middle Indo-Aryan language 
other than Pali is very limited. P. Skilling (2009) 
has identi fied several epigraphs of the ye dhamm ā 
verse in a Middle Indo-Aryan recension that dif-
fers from the standard Pali and Sanskrit recensions. 
This  so-called avaca  recension is attested in inscrip-
tions from Bihar and Bengal, written in the rare 
Bhaikshuki script, and also in several inscriptions 
found in Thailand, Cambodia, and Southern Viet-
nam. The Southeast Asian examples include inscrip-
tions of the verse on the back of a standing Buddha 
image from  7th-century Cambodia (K. 820; Skilling, 
1999; 2002), as well as on a gold plate of unknown 
provenance (though purchased in Bangkok) cur-
rently in the Musée Guimet (Skilling, 2003–2004). 
Another intriguing item is a brief Prakrit (or possi-
bly Hybrid Pali) donative inscription on the base of a 
small Buddha image released from a cetiya  (shrine) 
atop Shinma Mountain (near Pakhangyi, Burma) 
during an earthquake in 1975. This inscription is 
written in the Bhaikshuki script, otherwise unat-
tested in Southeast Asia (Sircar, 1977). It has since 
been reinstalled in the cetiya  and only an inexact 
 eye-copy remains available for consultation.
Inscriptions in Vernacular Languages
Inscriptions in Malay
The corpus of Old Malay inscriptions spans from 
the 7th through the 14th/15th centuries and has not 
yet been served by a comprehensive publication, 
but an inventory with extensive references to rel-
evant publications will be included in a survey by 
A. Griffiths (forthcoming b). The corpus is surpris-
ingly limited in size, given the likelihood that Malay 
served as lingua franca throughout the archipelago 
from early date, but most of the preserved Old Malay 

--- [Page 12] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  999
inscriptions are explicitly Buddhist. Unique within 
Nusantaran epigraphy is a group of three inscrip-
tions – found respectively at Sambas (West Kali-
mantan), Talang Tuwo (Palembang, South Sumatra) 
and Candi Sewu (Central Java) – stating explicitly in 
Old Malay that their text is a praṇidhāna (bodhisat-
tva vow; see Gri ffiths, 2014a, 147; Cœdès, 1930; 1992; 
Boechari, 2012: ch. 32, no. II; on such praṇidhānas, 
see also p. 1000; Tournier, 2014).
The majority of the Old Malay inscriptions of 
Śrīvijaya, belonging to the late 7th century, do not 
show any overt signs of a dominance of Buddhism 
in public life. However, such dominance is inferred 
from the evidence of the Talang Tuwo inscription, 
the occurrence of the term siddhayātra (see p. 994) in 
the Kedukan Bukit inscription, the occurrence of the 
phrase vihāra ini  (“this monastery”) in a fragmentary 
inscription from Palembang, the preponderance of 
Buddhist icons in the archaeological record, and 
other types of evidence (for the Śrīvijayan epigraphi-
cal material, see Cœdès, 1930; 1992; de Casparis, 1956: 
chs. 1–2; Boechari, 2012, chs. 24–25; Gri ffiths, 2011b).
A short inscription, possibly of the 8th century, 
engraved on a large sculpture of Avalokite śvara from 
Sumatra, consists only in the words ḍaṅ ācāryya 
sphuṭa (“Master Sphu ṭa”; Boechari, 2012, 373 [with 
unlikely reading syuṭa]). This might be a caption but 
is more likely a very brief donor statement. The sole 
vernacular element ḍaṅ being common to Malay 
and Javanese, the language of this short text can-
not be determined with certainty. Two substantial 
donative texts in Old Malay from Sumatra are the 
 late-10th-century Hujung Langit inscription from 
Lampung, not yet entirely published (Damais, 1962), 
and the  late-13th-century Padang Roco inscription 
from the upper Batanghari (Krom, 1916). In the high-
lands of West Sumatra, the aforementioned king 
Ādityavarman and his rough contemporaries have 
also left inscriptions in Old Malay, of which one (a 
large stela at Pagaruyung) is clearly donative while 
the purport of the two other Old Malay texts (one of 
which also at Pagaruyung, the other at Lubuk Lay-
ang) is rather unclear; very little has been published 
on these inscriptions, and nothing very reliable (see 
de Casparis, 1995; Budi Istiawan, 2006). Other dona-
tive inscriptions in Old Malay, respectively from 
South and North Sumatra, have been published by 
A. Griffiths (2011b and 2014b).
Mention should be made here of a substantial 
number of  rolled-up inscribed tin foils that have 
been found in recent years in the riverbed of the 
Batanghari at Muara Jambi. These seem to have 
functioned as amulets because they bear protective magical inscriptions that are de finitely  pre-Islamic 
but show no explicit signs of any speci fic religious 
context. Given the fact that no  non-Buddhist 
inscriptions are known from  pre-Islamic Sumatra, 
they may be loosely classi fied as Buddhist. A pub-
lication of a number of these is in preparation by  
A. Griffiths.
None of the few Old Malay inscriptions found on 
Java – except the aforementioned praṇidhāna found 
at Candi Sewu, known as the Mañju śrīgṛha inscrip-
tion – is Buddhist. The Old Malay Laguna copper-
plate inscription found near Manila on Luzon is a 
legal document that is not obviously Buddhist and 
is therefore only mentioned here.
Inscriptions in Javanese
The rich corpus of Old Javanese inscriptions, 
engraved both on stone supports and on copper-
plates, yields extensive data on Buddhism in early 
Java. This field too has not yet been served by any 
publications that cover more than speci fic sub-
groups of inscriptions, and many inscriptions whose 
readings have been published remain untranslated 
(important collections of Old Javanese inscriptions 
are Brandes, 1913; de Casparis, 1956; Inscripties van 
Nederlandsch-Indië , vol. I, 1940; Sarkar, 1971–1972; 
Boechari & Wibowo, 1985–1986; Boechari, 2012, ch. 32).
We may first mention the large corpus of short 
donor statements found on a number of Buddhist 
monuments from Central Java, most abundantly 
on Candi Plaosan Lor (de Casparis, 1958). As admit-
ted above (p. 988), we occasionally encounter the 
problem of whether we may conclude from the 
occurrence of certain keywords that a given dona-
tive inscription is Buddhist. A case in point is the 
Wayuku inscription of 854 ce, which records the 
demarcation by Rakai Sisai Pu Vir ājā of the rice 
fields at Wayuku in order that they become  rent-free 
holdings of his monastery at Abhayananda (lines 
4–6: manusuk sava ḥ i vayuku s īmāni bihāranira i 
abhayananda ; Sarkar, 1971–1972, no. 18). Can this 
monastery ( bihāra) here be assumed to have been 
Buddhist? This was certainly the case for the monas-
tery of Pikatan ( bihāra i pikatan ), whose rise and fall 
in royal favor over nearly the entire duration of Cen-
tral Javanese history is the subject of a unique his-
torical retrospective in the Wanua Tengah III plates 
issued under King Balitu ṅ in 908 ce, already men-
tioned in p. 995, because as part of its recital of the 
historical facts it incorporates a Sanskrit inscription 
issued by a previous ruler. This text is very rich in 
information about the practice of Buddhism in early 
Java. Other copperplate charters issued during the 

--- [Page 13] ---
1000 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
reign of Balitu ṅ (e.g. Sangsang; Sarkar, 1971–1972, no. 
72) also record donations to vih āras but tend to be 
poor in information that can directly be exploited by 
historians of Indian religions, whether these monas-
teries were Śaiva or Buddhist, because the richness 
of Javanese epigraphy lies rather in economic and 
onomastic domains.
The mentioned cases of ambiguity notwith-
standing, Javanese epigraphy knew certain explicit 
markers of religious a ffiliation, notably the use of 
the keyword sogata  (Skt. saugata ), or the use of an 
unambiguous invocation at the start of an epigraph: 
from the Buddhist tantric mantra ṭaki hūṃ jaḥ 
(Griffiths, 2014a, 178) to entirely unmistakable open-
ing phrases such as namo sarvabuddh āya (“Hail to 
all the buddhas!”; Harahara inscription; Brandes, 
1913, no. 55 – this text concerns a sanctuary named 
dharmma lpas kapodg ālikanani kulasant ānānira 
mpuṅku iṅ nairañjan ā: “the  tax-exempt founda-
tion that is the private property of the family of the 
master of Nairañjan ā”) or namo ’stu sarvabuddh āya 
(Śobhāmṛta; Titi Surti Nastiti, 2007); in one inscrip-
tion, we actually read oṃ namaś śivāya namo 
buddhāya (“Hail to Śiva! Hail to the Buddha!”; Taji 
Gunung; Sarkar, 1971–1972, no. 80). Among sig-
nificant Buddhist land grants, mention may finally 
be made here of the Ālasantan charter of 939 ce 
(Wibowo, 1979), recording transactions at the heart 
of the Trowulan complex that would in later centu-
ries become the capital of the Majapahit Kingdom. 
Two short inscriptions of 10th- and  13th-century East 
Java (Kubur Panjang and Lucem; Damais, 1952, 242; 
Hadi Sidomulyo, 2012–2013, 102) record the planting 
of Bodhi trees and are hence arguably traces of Bud-
dhist practices.
A small number of recent finds at and around the 
major Buddhist complex at Muara Jambi in Suma-
tra includes two remarkable documents in Old 
Javanese, a language whose cosmopolitan allure 
evidently was able to carry it far from the island 
of Java. These are a donative statement by a cer-
tain Mpu Kusuma on a makara  (roughly, crocodile 
image) balustrade (Gri ffiths, 2012) and an amazing 
tin  amulet-roll engraved in Grantha script but Old 
Javanese language (Gri ffiths, forthcoming c).
Inscriptions in Balinese (and Old Javanese 
from Bali)
The epigraphical record of the island of Bali com-
prises inscriptions in native Old Balinese, in Old 
Javanese, and in Sanskrit. There are some publi-
cations comprising readings of epigraphs, some-
times with translations (van Stein Callenfels, 1926; Stutterheim, 1929–1930; Goris, 1954). But on the 
whole, there is very little secondary literature to 
guide one in accessing the epigraphic material of 
the island, even less in a European language. Some 
Buddhist functionaries figure in a certain number of 
inscriptions, but the transactions being recorded do 
not seem to show a speci fic connection with Bud-
dhism. In a group of  late-10th-/ early-11th-century 
inscriptions, we find the elements Nalanda/Nal ənda 
(sic; for Nālandā) and Vārānasī (sic) integrated into 
the titles of such o fficiants, which suggest some 
degree of knowledge of the Buddhist as well as 
the Śaiva cosmopolis in India, although clearly the 
meaning here is not that these individuals actu-
ally came from India (Goris, 1954, no. 302, Va5; no. 
303, V5; no. 305, IXb3; see also Goris’ index, under 
wandāmi and sogata/nogata ).
Inscriptions in Khmer
Khmer, an Austroasiatic language related to Mon, 
was used alongside Sanskrit as epigraphic language 
in the Khmer cultural sphere from the early 7th until 
the early 15th century (for sources, see p. 992), dur-
ing which period the language is called Old Khmer. 
Old Khmer was used either by itself or in bilingual 
documents normally opening with a Sanskrit por-
tion. Most of the inscriptions that are relevant for 
Buddhist studies are listed by I. Harris (2005, app. 
A). Donative inscriptions on stone represent the 
largest volume of epigraphs in Old Khmer, and the 
language is in such contexts exclusively used to 
record the quotidian aspects of the transactions in 
question: dates, names of persons, toponyms, items 
donated, and so forth. Such documents reveal much 
about the economic life surrounding sanctuaries, 
and about the types of artifacts used in cult (Soutif, 
2009). Names of deities tend to figure more promi-
nently in the Sanskrit portions, if there are any, 
but the monolingual Old Khmer inscription K. 163  
(7th cent.) clearly implies a temple in which the 
triad  Buddha-Maitreya-Avalokite śvara was installed 
(Green, 2014, 72). Clear indications of the presence 
of tantric Buddhist cult of the Guhyasam āja tradi-
tion are contained in another inscription (K. 1158), 
whose Khmer portion mentions the installation of 
nine Buddhist sculptures on a hill named Abhaya-
giri (Szántó, forthcoming).
There is a growing corpus of short inscriptions 
on ritual utensils in bronze, with statements in 
Old Khmer recording donation to deities, some of 
them Buddhist (K. 943; K. 1296; Estève & Vincent,  
2010; Gri ffiths & Vincent, 2014). Normally a dona-
tion is explicitly recorded, but the inscription vraḥ 

--- [Page 14] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  1001
śrījayaprati ṣṭhā (“holy foundation of Śrī Jaya”), pos-
sibly signifying sponsorship by Jayavarman VII, is 
found on a Buddhist triad in bronze of which sev-
eral specimens are now known (K. 945; Vincent, 
2013, fig. 5). Furthermore, there is a large corpus of 
short stone inscriptions engraved on a number of 
monuments founded during the reign of this Bud-
dhist king: these represent a unique mix of the cap-
tion and donation types, for they record the names 
of deities that were formerly present in the form of 
presumably metal sculptures (none of which is pre-
served), and these names in turn are in many cases 
derived from the names of individuals who were 
presumably responsible for the commissioning of 
the images named after them (Maxwell, 2007). This 
large corpus is not exclusively Buddhist but rather 
represents a kind of pantheon of  late-Angkorian 
Cambodia; some of those which are Buddhist have 
turned out to be useful for the study of Khmer Bud-
dhist art (Sharrock, 2011).
A substantial number of Khmer inscriptions 
engraved on gold plates, issued by Ayutthayan kings 
in the 15th and 16th centuries, have also been found 
in the Tenasserim region of what is now peninsular 
Burma, as well as at  Ayutthaya-period sites in Thai-
land (Vickery, 1971). These record the conferring 
of titles on prominent individuals, some of whom 
members of the sa ṅgha. Another example of the 
use of Khmer as an epigraphic language in Buddhist 
contexts outside of the Khmer realm is the donative 
inscription on a bronze Buddha from peninsular 
Thailand, dating somewhere in the 12th–14th centu-
ries (K. 504; Woodward, 2005, 193–195).
There are, finally, about 100 stone inscriptions in 
Middle Khmer, from the 16th through the 18th cen-
tury (the  so-called Inscriptions modernes d’Angkor ) 
edited in a series of articles by Saveros Pou, initially 
writing under the name Saveros Lewitz (1972; see 
also Jenner, 2011, for further references). All of these 
are satyapra ṇidhān, statements in the first person 
of accomplished pious works accompanied by the 
dedication of the accruing merit toward happy and 
prosperous rebirths, protection from danger, and 
the eventual enlightenment of self and/or others 
(see p. 999). Being engraved on pillars of Angkor 
Wat, at the behest of members of the very high aris-
tocracy, these inscriptions constitute the bulk of 
 post-Angkorian Khmer epigraphy.
Inscriptions in Cam
Old Cam, an Austronesian language quite closely 
related to Old Malay, was used alongside Sanskrit 
as epigraphic language in ancient Camp ā and is attested between the 5th and the 15th century (for 
sources, see p. 993). A small number of inscrip-
tions in this language cast light on the patronage 
of Buddhism at di fferent periods. A damaged and 
still unpublished inscription from Hu ế in northern 
Campā, datable to about the 7th century, contains 
the keywords vihāra and bhikṣu, and so – if these are 
reliable indicators of Buddhism – indicates a form 
of the religion in which Sanskrit served as church 
language. A bilingual  Sanskrit-Cam inscription 
from the farthest south of Camp ā (C. 23) dated to 
829 ce records the foundation of vih āras of the Bud-
dha ( jina) and Śiva (śaṅkara ), thus revealing at least 
simultaneous patronage to Buddhism and Śaivism, 
if not already some early form of the syncretism 
between the two that is evident in later centuries 
(e.g. C. 213; Lepoutre, forthcoming). The king is 
praised in C. 211 (1050 ce) as tum̃ sarvvaśāstrāgama 
sidaḥ śaivasaugatasiddh āntakulāvdhimada  (“know-
ing all treatises and traditions, that is intoxicated by 
the splendid oceans which are the doctrines of the 
Śaivas and the Buddhists”). In fluence of Buddhism 
on royal ideology is found in a number of inscrip-
tions (C. 55, 83, 89, 90, 92, 101), in which the king 
is said to be endowed with 32 or 33 characteristics 
(lakṣaṇa), which seems to be at least in origin a Bud-
dhist concept, although the context is not always 
Buddhist in these cases; it is only in two inscriptions 
(C. 89; C. 122), which are clearly Buddhist in orien-
tation, that the king is called cakravarti  (universal 
emperor; Schweyer, 2006).
Inscriptions in Pyu
Although this is a subject of some controversy, we are 
inclined to assume that the inscriptions engraved in 
Pyu script basically represent a single language. This 
language is only very partially understood at present 
but was probably a member of the  Tibeto-Burman 
family. Only a small number of known Pyu inscrip-
tions have been deciphered and analyzed (Blagden, 
1913–1914; Shafer, 1943; Luce, 1985; Krech, 2012).  
Nevertheless it is clear that several of them must have 
been related to the practice and institutions of Bud-
dhism in ancient Burma. Some items in the Śrīkṣetra 
Museum, although undeciphered, are engraved on 
stone stelae or slabs displaying Buddhist motifs; the 
aforementioned bilingual inscription from Śrīkṣetra 
(see p. 992) is engraved on a Buddha image, and 
although the text does not evidently record instal-
lation of the image, the contents do clearly ema-
nate from a Buddhist context. The quadrilingual 
Myinkaba Kubyaukgyi edict (see p. 997), its Pyu 
version edited by Blagden (1919), is unmistakably a 

--- [Page 15] ---
1002 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
Buddhist donative inscription. The aforementioned 
silver reliquary bears caption inscriptions in Pyu 
identifying the major and minor figures depicted 
in repoussé (Luce, vol. I, 1985, 137). We can mention 
here finally the Hpayahtaung Urn, discovered in 
1993, which clearly invokes the triple jewel (line 1:  
būdhauunisttệ.uunisttệ.uunisttệ.uunisttệsaṅghauunisttệ.uunisttệ.uunisttệ.uunisttệradana , the latter word for 
Skt. ratna , so we have an unmistakable mention of 
at least two of the three Buddhist jewels; rendered 
almost identically in the anonymous reading pub-
lished on unnumbered pages between the articles 
Tun Aung Chain, 2003 and San Win, 2003). But such 
cases are rather rare in most texts that we have seen: 
from a comparative Southeast Asian perspective, 
the extremely low proportion of Indic loanwords in 
the Pyu inscriptions is remarkable. Hence, as long 
as most documents remain untransliterated and the 
language largely undeciphered, we can only specu-
late about how they might be classi fied. An inven-
tory of the Pyu corpus will be o ffered in Gri ffiths  
et al ., forthcoming.
Inscriptions in Mon
The Austroasiatic Mon language was used to write 
donative inscriptions from the 6th century ce 
onward (Cœdès, 1952a). Inscriptions in Mon from 
the 1st millennium have been discovered across 
central mainland Southeast Asia, in areas that are 
part of  modern-day lower Burma (possibly 6th–7th 
cents.; Mya, 1961; Myint Aung, 1999), central, north-
ern, and northeastern Thailand (6th cent.; Bauer, 
1991a; 1991b; Revire, 2014), and Laos (8th cent.; Gag-
neux, 1972; Guillon, 1974). These include epigraphs 
on terracotta sealings, stone slabs, Buddha images, 
and, in Thailand, dharmacakra  wheels, possibly 
miniature st ūpas, and stones that have been identi-
fied as sīmā, boundary markers within which monks 
perform ritual acts ( saṅghakamma ), although 
whether this exclusive function can be applied to 
all of such stones in  1st-millennium Southeast Asia 
remains uncertain (comp. K. 981, clearly document-
ing the function of one of them as a ritual boundary; 
see also Murphy, 2014). A number of these artifacts 
bear bilingual inscriptions, with a donative portion 
in Mon and a textual citation or caption inscription 
in Pali. Although some  1st-millennium sīmās from 
northeastern Thailand are inscribed in monolingual 
Sanskrit (Cœdès, 1958), bilingual Mon and Sanskrit 
inscriptions are unknown.
Some inscribed sīmās present Mon glosses to 
carved depictions of jātaka  scenes or episodes of the 
life of Gotama Buddha (Bauer, 1991a; Murphy, 2014). 
A similar  Mon-inscribed sīmā has also been found in Thaton in lower Burma, along with a separate 
dedicatory inscription in Mon, dated to the 11th cen-
tury (Luce, vol. II, 1985, plate 92d). Caption inscrip-
tions engraved into their support or written on it in 
ink accompany narrative frescoes and terracotta 
plaques at some temple sites in Pagan and elsewhere 
in Burma (Duroiselle, 1921b; Luce, 1961; 1975; Shorto, 
1966). At least 15 lengthy stone donative inscriptions 
in Mon date to the reign of King Kyanzittha of Pagan 
(r. c. 1084–1113), the southernmost of which is from 
Tavoy (Chit Thein, 1965). A large quantity of sealings 
inscribed in Mon and dated to the 11th and 12th cen-
turies have been found in lower and upper Burma 
and across central and northern Thailand, evidence 
of the wide geographic di ffusion of  Mon-speaking 
communities well into the 2nd millennium (Guil-
lon, 1977; Luce & Ba Shin, 1969–1970). The Mon epig-
raphy from several  13th-century temple complexes 
in Lampun, Thailand, is particularly noteworthy 
(Halliday, 1930). Later Mon inscriptions are concen-
trated mainly in lower Burma (Chit Thein, 1965), 
with several examples from Thailand and perhaps 
even as far west as Arakan. These mainly comprise 
donative inscriptions on stone slabs and also on 
bells plus the aforementioned unique copperplate 
(Shorto, 1971).
Inscriptions in Burmese and Arakanese
Inscriptions in central Burmese and the south-
western Burmese dialect of Arakanese are the most 
numerous among vernacular Buddhist epigraphy 
from Southeast Asia. Over 600 early stone inscrip-
tions from Burma and Arakan are presented in fac-
simile reproductions in the major work Inscriptions 
of Burma  (ed. Luce & Pe Maung Tin, 1934–1956). 
The focus of the volumes is on inscriptions from 
Burma in any language up to the  mid-14th century, 
although the majority of the items included are cen-
tral Burmese. Readings of Burmese and Pali lithic 
inscriptions have also been published in Roman 
and modern Burmese script transliteration. During 
the colonial era, there were a number of such pub-
lications (see generally the introductory remarks 
in Duroiselle, 1921a). A substantial e ffort by Bur-
mese scholars has produced six volumes that cover 
approximately 900 donative lithic inscriptions pro-
duced between the  mid-11th and the  late-18th cen-
tury (Nyein Maung et al ., 1972–2013), although many 
others remain unpublished.
The beginning of vernacular Burmese epigraphy 
is conventionally dated to the Burmese face of the 
quadrilingual Myinkaba Kubyaukgyi inscription 
of Rājakumāra (mentioned in on pp. 997, 1001).  

--- [Page 16] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  1003
A number of inscriptions carry earlier dates, but 
their authenticity in many cases is uncertain, as 
some contain paleographic or calendrical inconsis-
tencies that suggest they may be unfaithful copies. 
The only translation into a European language of 
a considerable number of Burmese inscriptions is 
outdated, although it may still serve as an introduc-
tion to the material (Tun Nyein, 1899). A project was 
begun by G.H. Luce, Pe Maung Tin, and Ba Shin in 
the  mid-1950s to critically edit and translate early 
Burmese inscriptions into English, although only a 
handful were published in the first (1960) and third 
(1963) issues of the Bulletin of the Burma Historical 
Commission  (for a list of translations of Old Burmese 
inscriptions, see Frasch, 2005).
Aside from lithic inscriptions, there is a large 
corpus of Burmese ink epigraphy. These comprise 
donative texts and horoscopes written on temple 
walls (Swe, 2001; Ba Shin, 1964) and caption inscrip-
tions to narrative registers in plaques and painted 
murals, which date from the 12th century up to the 
present day (Ba Shin, 1962; Munier & Myint Aung, 
2007). Various other objects carry early to late 
 2nd-millennium Burmese inscriptions, including 
sealings (Mya, 1961; Aung Kyaing, 2011), bells (Sein 
Maung U, 2014), lacquerware, wood and metal 
images, monastic utensils, and metal plates, most 
of which remain unpublished. A substantial col-
lection of over six thousand  19th-century donative 
inscriptions on copper plaques from the Shwed-
agon Pagoda have been edited (Kyan & Yi Yi, 2007). 
 Burmese-language inscriptions have been found 
outside of Burma, including at Bodh Gaya (late 13th 
cent.; Luce, 1976) and in Northern Thailand, where 
examples include an epigraph in Burmese, Thai, and 
possibly also Mon, on a Buddha image ( mid-16th 
cent.; Kraisri, 1960; Penth, 1976, 98–102).
Inscriptions in Tai Languages
Tai languages were used in Buddhist epigraphy 
from the 13th century onward. Speakers of various 
Tai dialects settled across mainland Southeast Asia 
over the course of the 2nd millennium, and several 
different Tai languages have found usage in epigra-
phy, among them Lao, Central Thai, Tai Yuan, Tai 
Lue, and Khoen.
An important published corpus of vernacular 
 Tai-language inscriptions from Thailand is the 
Prachum charuk sayam /Recueil des inscriptions du 
Siam , edited in modern Thai script and translated 
into French by G. Cœdès (1924–1929). The series was 
continued, without translation, for an additional 
six volumes under the title Prachum sila charuk  (1924–2004), bringing its total number of inscrip-
tions to 327. A more recent corpus is the  five-volume 
Charuk nai prathet Thai  (1986), published by the Fine 
Arts Department of Thailand, which is arranged by 
script (Pallava, Late Pallava, Mon, Khom/Old Khmer, 
Tham/Dhamma, and Thai) and ranges chronologi-
cally from the 7th to the 19th century. Both collec-
tions cover vernacular Tai inscriptions as well as 
materials in Pali, Sanskrit, Tamil, Khmer, and Mon, 
found in Thailand. The most comprehensive pre-
sentation of epigraphy from Northern Thailand is 
the Corpus of L ān Nā Inscriptions , now in its 15th vol-
ume (Penth et al ., 1997–2013; compare also Prasert, 
1992–2008; and the websites of the Corpus of Lan Na 
Inscriptions and The Inscriptions in Thailand Data-
base). P.-M. Gagneux (1977) inventoried Buddhist 
inscriptions from Laos, although there have been 
relatively few publications of  Tai-language epigra-
phy outside of Thailand (Lorrillard, 2003b).
The earliest epigraphic evidence for any Tai lan-
guage is generally dated to the stela of King Ram-
khamhaeng established in 1292, an inscription that 
contains a lengthy eulogy to this king and celebrates 
his many works of merit and the prosperity of the 
central Thai kingdom of Sukhothai (13th cent.–1438) 
during his rule. It is written in what scholarship has 
referred to as the Sukhothai script (despite the fact 
that examples of this script are found in northern 
Thailand) and explicitly credits this king with the 
invention of this writing system, which moreover 
displays certain peculiarities, when judged against 
Indic and other regional scripts, in its representa-
tion of vowels. This is the most intensively studied 
vernacular Buddhist inscription from mainland 
Southeast Asia, and controversies surround its date 
(for an overview of the debate, see Terwiel, 2010). 
This and several other early vernacular inscriptions 
from Sukhothai and elsewhere have been edited 
and translated into English (Prasert & Griswold, 
1992). H. Penth (1996) has proposed a date of 1219 
for a Tai donative inscription from Phrae, northern 
Thailand, written in a script similar to that used in 
the Ramkhamhaeng stela. The earliest vernacular 
inscription from northern Thailand written in a dis-
tinctive northern Thai script is found on the pedes-
tal of a Buddha image dated 1465 (Penth, 1975). Two 
very short painted epigraphs in vernacular Tai have 
been discovered in caves near Luang Prabang, Laos, 
and have been tentatively dated to the 14th century 
on the basis of similarities with Sukhothai script 
(Ferlus, 1995). Otherwise the oldest Lao inscription 
is dated 1494, although this example displays certain 
affinities with the fak kham  (“tamarind pod”) script 

--- [Page 17] ---
1004 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
used in central and northern Thailand (Lorrillard, 
2008).
 Tai-language Buddhist lithic inscriptions have so 
far not been reported from China, despite the large 
number of surviving Tai Buddhist manuscripts in 
Yunnan. Several Tai lithic inscriptions have been 
found in Kengtung, Burma (see Prachum sila charuk ,  
1991), the earliest dating to the  mid-15th century 
(Prasert & Griswold, 1992). Two  16th-century 
inscribed Buddha images are known from the Shan 
States, Burma, possibly written in Tai Lue (Griswold, 
1959). Documented inscriptions in Tai Ahom from 
northeastern India are not obviously Buddhist in 
orientation. More research is needed on these areas. 
In  non-Tai speaking regions of Burma, donative ink 
inscriptions in Tai have been discovered, for exam-
ple at the Ananda Temple in Pagan (see Prachum 
sila charuk , 1991) and also a short caption in Thai in a 
 19th-century temple in Minbu, whose mural register s 
are otherwise captioned in Burmese (Orawin, 2010).
The  mid-14th-century caption inscriptions at 
Wat Si Chum, an important Sukhothai temple, have 
received considerable scholarly attention. These 
comprise vernacular glosses to the first one hundred 
verse jātaka s, illustrations of which were engraved 
on slabs placed in the temple (Skilling, 2008). Thai 
and Lao murals are also often accompanied by cap-
tion inscriptions. A particularly extensive example 
of central Thai vernacular citation inscription are 
the over 1500 inscribed stone slabs at Wat Chetu-
phon in Bangkok, commissioned by the Thai king 
Rama III in the 1830s, which include excerpts from 
the Tipiṭaka, Mahāvaṃsa, medical and nīti treatises, 
Thai poetry, and the Thai Rāmāyaṇa (Niyada, 2001).
Bibliography
Allen, S.J., “An Inscribed Tablet from Kedah, Malaysia: Com-
parison with Earlier Finds,” AP 27, 1986–1987, 35–57.
Antelme, M., “Inventaire provisoire des caractères et divers 
signes des écritures khmères  pré-modernes et modernes, 
pour un essai de translittération basée sur l’ASCII, du 
khmer, du siamois et des dialectes thaïs méridionaux,” 
2007, http://aefek.free.fr/iso_album/antelme_bis.pdf.
Aung Kyaing (Ao ṅ Kruiṅ), Rheḥ hoṅḥ aut khvak rup pv āḥ 
chaṅḥ tu tau my āḥ (Votive Tablets of Burma), vol. III,  
Yangon, 2011.
Aung Thaw (Ao ṅ Sau), “Nok tve. py ū yañ kye ḥ mhu athok 
athāḥ myāḥ” (Recent Evidence for Pyu Culture), in: Aung 
Thaw, Myint Aung (Mra ṅ. Aoṅ), Sein Maung Oo (Cin Mo ṅ 
Ūḥ) & Than Shwe (San ḥ Chve), Rheḥ hoṅ mran m ā mrui. tau 
myāḥ (Ancient Burmese Cities), Yangon, 1993, 222–238.
Aung Thaw, Historical Sites in Burma , Rangoon, 1972.Aung Thaw, Report on the Excavations at Beikthano , Ran-
goon, 1968.
Ba Shin (Bha Rha ṅ), Pu gaṁ maṅ cā cu sutesana lup ṅanḥ 
(Research on Pagan Ink Inscriptions), Rangoon, 1964.
Ba Shin, The Lokahteikpan: Early Burmese Culture in a Pagan 
Temple , Rangoon, 1962.
Bauer, C., “Notes on Mon Epigraphy  I–II,” JSS 79/1, 1991a, 
31–73; 79/2, 1991b, 61–80.
 Bautze-Picron, C., “New Documents of Burmese Sculpture: 
Unpublished ‘Andag ū’ Images,” IAZ 10, 2006, 32–47.
Blagden, C.O., “Mon inscriptions,” EpBir  1/2, 1920.
Blagden, C.O., “The Pyu Face of the Myazedi Inscription at 
Pagan,” EpBir  1/1, 1919, 59–68.
Blagden, C.O., “The ‘Pyu’ Inscriptions,” EpInd  12, 1913–1914, 
127–132.
Boechari, Melacak Sejarah Kuno Indonesia lewat Prasasti /
Tracing Ancient Indonesian History through Inscription , 
Jakarta, 2012.
Boechari & A.S. Wibowo, Prasasti Koleksi Museum Nasional , 
vol. I, Jakarta, 1985–1986.
Boeles, J.J., “The King of Śrī Dvāravatī and His Regalia,” JSS 
52/1, 1964, 99–114.
Bollée, W.B., “Some Less Known Burmese Pali Texts,” in: J.C. 
Heesterman, G.H. Schokker & V.I. Subramoniam, eds., 
Pratidānam: Indian, Iranian and Indo-European Studies 
Presented to Franciscus Bernardus Jacobus Kuiper on His 
Sixtieth Birthday , The Hague, 1968, 493–499.
Bosch, F.D.K., “De Inscriptie op het  Aksobhya-Beeld van 
Gondang Lor,” TBG  69, 1919–1921, 498–428.
Brandes, J.L.A., Oud-Javaansche oorkonden: Nagelaten tran-
scripties , VBGKW 60/1–2, Batavia, 1913.
Brandes, J.L.A., Beschrijving van de ruïne bij de desa Toem-
pang genaamd Tjandi Djago, in de residentie Pasoeroean , 
AOJM 1, The Hague, 1904.
Brown, R.L., The Dvāravatī Wheels of the Law and the Indian-
ization of South East Asia , Leiden, 1996.
Budi Istiawan, Selintas Prasasti Dari Melayu Kuno  (Brief 
Overview of the Inscriptions of Ancient Melayu), Batu-
sangkar, 2006.
Caldwell, I., & A. Appelby Hazelwood, “‘The Holy Footprints 
of the Venerable Gautama’: A New Translation of the Pasir 
Panjang Inscription,” BKI 150/3, 1994, 457–480.
Casparis, J.G. de, “Peranan Adityawarman, putera Melayu di 
Asia Tenggara (The role of Adityawarman, son of Melayu 
in Southeast Asia),” in: I. Hussein, A. Deraman & A. Rah-
man al Ahmadi, eds., Tamadun Melayu , vol. III, Kuala 
Lumpur, 1995, 918–943.
Casparis, J.G. de, “Some Aspects of the Expansion of N āgarī 
Script in South and Southeast Asia,” in: G. de la Lama, ed., 
South Asia  1: 30th International Congress of Human Sci-
ences in Asia and North Africa , Mexico City, 1982, 123–138.
Casparis, J.G. de, Indonesian Palaeography: A History of Writ-
ing in Indonesia from the Beginnings to c. A.D. 1500 , HdO 
3/4/1, Leiden, 1975.
Casparis, J.G. de, Short Inscriptions from Tjandi Plaosan-Lor , 
BLPPN 4, Jakarta, 1958.
Casparis, J.G. de, Selected Inscriptions from the 7th to the 9th 
Century A.D., PI 2, Bandung, 1956.
Chen  Yi-Sein, “The Chinese Inscription at Pagan,” BBHRC  1/2, 
1960, 153–157.

--- [Page 18] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  1005
 Charuk nai prathet thai , publ. Fine Arts Department, 5 vols., 
Bangkok, 1986.
Chhabra, B.C., “Expansion of  Indo-Aryan Culture during Pal-
lava Rule as Evidenced by Inscriptions,” JASB (Letters)  1/1, 
1935, 1–64.
Chia, S.M.S., & B. Watson Andaya, eds., Bujang Valley and 
Early Civilisations in Southeast Asia , KPKKJWN, Malaysia, 
2011.
Chit Thein (Khyac Sin ḥ), Mvan kyok c ā poṅḥ khyup  (Col-
lected Mon Inscriptions), Rangoon, 1965.
Chutiwongs, N., “Le bouddhisme au Champa,” in: P. Baptiste 
& T. Zéphir, eds., Trésors d’art du Vietnam: La sculpture du 
Champa, V e–XVe siècles , Paris, 2005, 65–87.
Cœdès, G., “The Kingdom of Sriwijaya,” in: P.-Y. Manguin & 
M. Sheppard, eds., Sriwijaya: History, Religion and Lan-
guage of an Early Malay Polity: Collected Studies by George 
Coedès and Louis-Charles Damais , MBRAS 20, 1992a, 1–40.
Cœdès, G., “The Malay Inscriptions of Sriwijaya,” in: P.-Y. 
Manguin & M. Sheppard, eds., Sriwijaya: History, Religion 
and Language of an Early Malay Polity: Collected Studies 
by George Coedès and Louis-Charles Damais ,MBRAS 20, 
1992b, 41–92.
Cœdès, G., “Nouvelles données épigraphiques sur l’histoire 
de l’Indochine centrale,” JA 246/2, 1958, 125–142.
Cœdès, G., “A propos de deux fragments d’inscription récem-
ment découverts à P’ra Pathom (Thaïlande),” CRAIBL  6/1, 
1952a, 146–150.
Cœdès, G., “Un yantra  découvert récemment à Angkor,” JA 
240, 1952b, 465–477.
Cœdès, G., “Études Cambodgiennes, XXXIX: L’épigraphie des 
monuments de Jayavarman VII,” BEFEO  44/1, 1951, 97–120.
Cœdès, G., Inscriptions du Cambodge , 8 vols., vol. I, Hanoi; 
vols. II–VIII, Paris, 1937–1966.
Cœdès, G., “Les inscriptions malaises de Çr īvijaya,” BEFEO  
30, 1930, 29–80.
Cœdès, G., Prachum charuk sayam /Recueil des inscriptions du 
Siam , 2 vols., Bangkok, 1924–1929.
Cœdès, G., “Le Royaume de Çr īvijaya,” BEFEO  18/6, 1918, 1–36.
Cœdès, G., & H. Parmentier, Listes générales des inscriptions 
et des monuments du Champa et du Cambodge , Hanoi, 1923.
Cruijsen, T., A. Gri ffiths & M.J. Klokke, “The Cult of the Bud-
dhist dhāraṇī Deity Mah āpratisarā along the Maritime 
Silk Route: New Epigraphic and Iconographic Evidence 
from the Indonesian Archipelago,” JIABS  35/1–2, 2012, 
71–157.
Damais, L.-C., “Études soumatranaises, I: La date de 
l’inscription de Hujung Langit,” BEFEO  50/2, 1962, 275–288.
Damais, L.-C., “Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne, III: Liste 
des principales inscriptions datées de l’Indonésie,” BEFEO  
46/1, 1952, 1–105.
Dimitrov, D., The Bhaik ṣukī Manuscript of the Candr ālaṃkāra: 
Study, Script Tables, and Facsimile Edition , HOS 72, Cam-
bridge MA, 2010.
Duroiselle, C., “Bhamo,” ARASI , 1929–1930, 160–161.
Duroiselle, C., “Excavations at Hmawza,” in: ASB 1928 ,  
Rangoon, 1928, 105–109.
Duroiselle, C., “Excavations at Hmawza,” in: ASB 1926 ,  
Rangoon, 1926, 171–183.
Duroiselle, C., A List of Inscriptions Found in Burma , Rangoon, 
1921a.Duroiselle, C., Epigraphia Birmanica , vol. 2/1, Rangoon, 1921b.
Estève, J., “Étude critique des phénomènes de syncrétisme 
religieux dans le Cambodge angkorien,” diss., École pra-
tique des hautes études: Section des sciences religieuses, 
Paris, 2009.
Estève, J., & B. Vincent, “L’about inscrit du musée national 
du Cambodge (K. 943): Nouveaux éléments sur le boud-
dhisme tantrique à l’époque angkorienne,” ArtAsiat  65, 
2010, 133–158.
Falk, H., “Die Goldblätter aus Śrī Kṣetra,” WZKS  41, 1997, 
53–92.
Ferlus, M., “L’inscription rupestre de Nang An (Louang Phra-
bang),” in: Premier symposium franco-thai: La Thailande 
des debuts de son histoire jusqu’au XV e siècle, 18–24 juillet 
1988, Université Silpakorn , Bangkok, 1995, 110–116.
Finot, L., “Un nouveau document sur le bouddhisme bir-
man,” JA 20, 1912, 121–136.
Francis, E., “Une inscription tamoule inédite au musée 
d’histoire du Vietnam de Hô Chi  Minh-Ville,” BEFEO  
95–96, 2008–2009, 409–423.
Frasch, T., “Inscriptions from Bagan, Edited and Translated,” 
in: Essays in Commemoration of the Golden Jubilee of the 
Myanmar Historical Commission , Yangon, 2005, 134–148.
Frasch, T., Pagan. Stadt und Staat , BSAF 172, Stuttgart, 1996.
Gagneux, P.-M., Recueil des inscriptions du Laos , vol. I, Vien-
tiane, 1977.
Gagneux, P.-M., “Vers une révolution dans l’archéologie 
indochinoise: Le Buddha et les stèles de Thalat,” BARL  
7–8, 1972, 83–105.
Gerschheimer, G., “Le Corpus des inscriptions khmères,” 
BEFEO  90–91, 2003–2004, 478–482.
Golzio, K.-H., ed., Inscriptions of Camp ā: Based on the Editions 
and Translations of Abel Bergaigne, Etienne Aymonier, 
Louis Finot, Edouard Huber and Other French Scholars and 
of the Work of R.C. Majumdar , Aachen, 2004.
Goris, R., Inscripties voor Anak Wungçu , PB 1, Bandung, 1954.
Green, P.S.E., “The Many Faces of Loke śvara: Tantric Con-
nections in Cambodia and Camp ā between the Tenth and 
Thirteenth Centuries,” HR 54/1, 2014, 69–93.
Griffiths, A., “The Sanskrit Inscription of Śaṅkara,” in: Selected 
Inscriptions of Java in the Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Centuries  
(working title), forthcoming a.
Griffiths, A., “Inscriptions in Old Malay,” in: D. Perret, ed., 
Southeast Asian Epigraphy  (working title), forthcoming b.
Griffiths, A., “Inscriptions of Sumatra, IV: Ancient Amulets in 
Sanskrit, Malay and Javanese,” forthcoming c.
Griffiths, A., “Three More Sanskrit Inscriptions of Araka n: New 
Perspectives on Its Name, Dynastic History and Buddhist 
Culture in the First Millennium,” JBuS , forthcoming d.
Griffiths, A., “Written Traces of the Buddhist Past: Mantra s 
and Dhāraṇīs in Indonesian Inscriptions,” BSOAS  77/1, 
2014a, 137–194.
Griffiths, A., “Inscriptions of Sumatra, III: The Padang Lawas 
Corpus Studied along with Inscriptions from Sorik Merapi 
(North Sumatra) and from Muara Takus (Riau),” in:  
D. Perret, ed., History of Padang Lawas, North Sumatra , II: 
Societies of Padang Lawas (Mid-Ninth– Thirteenth Century 
ce), CA 43, Paris, 2014b, 211–253.
Griffiths, A., “The ‘Greatly Ferocious’ Spell ( Mahāraudra-
Nāma-Hṛdaya ): A dhāraṇī Inscribed on a  Lead-Bronze 

--- [Page 19] ---
1006 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
Foil Unearthed near Borobudur,” in: K. Tropper, ed., Epi-
graphic Evidence in the Pre-Modern Buddhist World: Pro-
ceedings of the Eponymous Conference Held in Vienna, 14–15 
Oct. 2011 , Vienna, 2014c, 1–36.
Griffiths, A., “Inscriptions of Sumatra, II: Short Epigraphs in 
Old Javanese,” Wacana  14/2, 2012, 197–214.
Griffiths, A., “Imagine La ṅkapura at Prambanan,” in: A. Acri, 
H. Creese & A. Gri ffiths, eds., From La ṅkā Eastwards: The 
Rāmāyaṇa in the Literature and Visual Arts of Indonesia , 
KITLV 247, Leiden, 2011a, 133–148.
Griffiths, A., “Inscriptions of Sumatra: Further Data on the 
Epigraphy of the Musi and Batang Hari River Basins,” 
Archipel  81, 2011b, 129–175.
Griffiths, A., B. Hudson & J. Wheatley, “New Studies in Pyu 
Epigraphy,” BEFEO , forthcoming.
Griffiths, A., A. Lepoutre, W.A. Southworth & Thành Ph ần, 
Văn khắc Chămpa tại Bảo tàng Điêu khắc Chăm – Đà Nẵng/
The Inscriptions of Camp ā at the Museum of Cham Sculp-
ture in Đà Nẵng, Ho Chi Minh City, 2012.
Griffiths, A., A. Lepoutre, W.A. Southworth & Thành Ph ần, 
“Études du corpus des inscriptions du Camp ā, III: Épigra-
phie du Camp ā 2009–2010: Prospection sur le terrain, pro-
duction d’estampages, supplément à l’inventaire,” BEFEO  
95–96, 2008–2009, 435–497.
Griffiths, A., N. Revire & R. Sanyal, “An Inscribed Bronze 
Sculpture of a Buddha in bhadrāsana  at Museum Rang-
gawarsita in Semarang (Central Java, Indonesia),” ArtAsiat  
68, 2013, 3–26.
Griffiths, A., & B. Vincent, “Un vase khmer inscrit de la fin du 
XIIe siècle (K. 1296),” ArtAsiat  69, 2014, 115–128.
Griswold, A.B., “Two Dated Images from the Shan States,” 
ArtAs  22/1–2, 1959, 59–63.
Guillon, E., “Recherches sur quelques inscriptions mônes,” 
BEFEO  64, 1977, 83–114.
Guillon, E., “Recherches sur quelques inscriptions môn,” 
BEFEO  61, 1974, 339–348.
Gutman, P., “Ancient Arakan: With Special Reference to Its 
Cultural History between the 5th and 11th Centuries,” diss., 
Australian National University, Canberra, 1976.
Guy, J., ed., Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early 
Southeast Asia , New York, 2014.
Hadi Sidomulyo, “Gravestones and Candi  stones,” BEFEO  99, 
2012–2013, 95–152.
Halliday, R. “Les inscriptions môn du Siam,” BEFEO  30, 1930, 
81–105.
Harris, I., Cambodian Buddhism: History and Practice , Hono-
lulu, 2005.
Hinüber, O. von, “Epigraphical Varieties of Continental P āli 
from Devnimori and Ratnagiri,” in: H ōjun Nagasaki, ed., 
Bukkyō to Ishūkyō: Kumoi Sh ōzen Hakushi Koki Kinen/ 
Buddhism and Its Relation to Other Religions: Essays in 
Honour of Dr. Shozen Kumoi on His Seventieth Birthday , 
Kyoto, 1985, 185–200.
 Inscripties van Nederlandsch-Indië , publ. Koninklijk Bata-
viaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen,  
vol. I, Batavia, 1940.
Issatriadi, Stupika Tanah Liat Bermaterai Gumuk Klinting , 
Surabaya, 1977. Jacq-Hergoualc’h, M., The Malay Peninsula: Crossroads of 
the Maritime Silk Road (100 BC–1300 AD), HdO 3/13, Leiden, 
2002.
 Jacq-Hergoualc’h, M., La civilisation de ports-entrepôts du Sud 
Kedah (Malaysia): V e-XIVe siècle , Paris, 1992.
Jacques, C., “Supplément au tome VIII des Inscriptions du 
Cambodge,” BEFEO  58, 1971, 177–195.
Jenner, P.N., A Dictionary of Middle Khmer , Canberra, 2011.
Johnston, E.H., “Some Sanskrit Inscriptions of Arakan,” 
BSOAS  11/2, 1944, 357–385.
Kozok, U., & E. van Reijn. “ Ādityawarman: Three Inscriptions 
of the Sumatran ‘King of All Supreme Kings’: Translated 
and Annotated from H. Kern and F.D.K. Bosch,” IMW  38, 
2010, 135–158.
Kraisri Nimmanahaeminda, “A Chiengmai Image Inscribed 
in Burmese and Tai,” JBuRS  43, 1960, 63–66.
Krech, U., “A Preliminary Reassessment of the Pyu Faces 
of the Myazedi Inscriptions at Pagan,” in: N.W. Hill, ed., 
Medieval Tibeto-Burman Languages , Brill’s TSL 13, Leiden, 
2012, 121–169.
Krom, N.J., Barabuḍur: Archaeological Description , 2 vols., 
The Hague, 1927.
Krom, N.J., “Een Sumatraansche Inscriptie van Koning 
Kṛtanagara,” VMKAW  5/2, 1916, 306–339.
Krüger, P.F., & T. Letz, “Ein Bronzesiegel aus Thayekhetaya, 
Myanmar,” in: G.J.R. Mevissen & K. Bruhn, eds., Vanamālā: 
Festschrift A.J. Gail , Berlin, 2006, 89–91.
Kulke, H., “Adityavarman’s Highland kingdom,” in: D. Bonatz, 
J.N. Miksic, J.D. Neidel & M.L. Tjoa-Bonatz, eds., From Dis-
tant Tales: Archaeology and Ethnohistory in the Highlands 
of Sumatra , Newcastle upon Tyne, 2009, 229–252.
Kyan (Kran), Daw (Dau) & Daw Yi Yi (Dau R ī Rī), Rhve ti gu ṁ 
cetī tau krīḥ mha kre ḥ aut myāḥ (Copper Plaques from the 
Shwedagon Cetiya), Yangon, 2007.
Kyaw Minn Htin, “Early Buddhism in Myanmar: Ye Dhamm ā 
Inscriptions from Arakan,” in: P.-Y. Manguin, A. Mani &  
G. Wade, eds., Early Interactions between South and South-
east Asia: Re flections on Cross-cultural Exchange , NSS 2, 
Singapore, 2011, 385–406.
Lepoutre, A., “Études du corpus des inscriptions du Camp ā, 
VII: L’inscription de Jaya Parame śvaravarman émise à 
Tháp Đôi (C. 213) avec en annexe deux autres nouvelles 
inscriptions du même souverain (C. 218.2 et C. 219),” 
BEFEO , forthcoming.
Lewitz, S., “Les inscriptions modernes d’Angkor Vat,” JA, 1972, 
107–129.
Long, M., Voices from the Mountain: The Śailendra Inscrip-
tions Discovered in Central Java and the Malay Peninsula , 
ŚPS 648, New Delhi, 2014.
Lorrillard, M., “Écritures et histoire: Le cas du Laos,” Aséanie  
22, 2008, 63–84.
Lorrillard, M., “Les inscriptions du That Luang de Vientiane: 
données nouvelles sur l’histoire d’un stūpa lao,” BEFEO  
90–91, 2003–2004a, 289–348.
Lorrillard, M., “Les recherches épigraphiques au Laos,” 
BEFEO  90–91, 2003–2004b, 475–78.
Lu Pe Win, “The  Gold-Leaf Pali Manuscript of Old Prome,” in: 
ASB, 1938–1939 , Rangoon, 1940, 12–22.

--- [Page 20] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  1007
Luce, G.H., Phases of Pre-Pagán Burma: Languages and His-
tory , 2 vols., Oxford, 1985.
Luce, G.H., “Sources of Early Burmese History,” in:  C.D. Cowan 
& O.W. Wolters, eds., Southeast Asian History and Historio-
graphy: Essays Presented to D.G.E. Hall , Ithaca NY, 1976, 
31–42.
Luce, G.H., “Pali and Old Mon Ink Glosses in Pagan Temples,” 
JBuRS  58/2, 1975, 118–273.
Luce, G.H., “The Advent of Buddhism to Burma,” in: L. Cous-
ins, A. Kunst & K.R. Norman, eds., Buddhist Studies in Hon-
our of I.B. Horner , Dordrecht, 1974, 119–138.
Luce, G.H., “Myinkaba  Kubyauk-Gyi Temple of R ājakumār 
(1113 A.D.), and the Old Mon Writings on Its Walls,” BBHRC  
2, 1961, 277–416.
Luce, G.H., & Ba Shin, Old Burma–Early Pagán , 3 vols., ArtAs 
Supplementum 25, Locust Valley, 1969–1970.
Luce, G.H., & Pe Maung Tin, eds., Inscriptions of Burma ,  
5 vols., URP 6, Oxford, 1934–1956.
Mabbett, I., “Buddhism in Champa,” in: D.G. Marr & A.C. Milner,  
eds., Southeast Asia in the 9th to 14th Centuries , Singapore, 
1986, 219–313.
Malleret, L., L’archéologie du delta du Mékong , 4 vols., PEFEO 
43, Paris, 1959–1963.
Manta le ḥ mahāmuni ta ṃ tuiṅḥ atvaṅḥ rhi kyok c ā myāḥ 
(Inscriptions at the Mah āmuni Pagoda, Mandalay), vol. I, 
publ. History Department, University of Yangon, Yangon, 
1989; vols.  II-III, publ. Myanmar Historical Commission, 
Yangon, 2006.
Maxwell, T.S., “The Short Inscriptions of the Bayon and Con-
temporary Temples,” in: J. Clark, ed., Bayon: New Perspec-
tives , Bangkok, 2007, 122–135.
Mertens, J., Sanskrit-Inschriften von Bat Chum (Kambodscha).  
Text mit Übersetzung und Kommentar und stilistischer 
Analyse , Norderstedt, 2005.
Munier, C., & Myint Aung, Burmese Buddhist Murals , vol. I:  
Epigraphic Corpus of the Powin Taung Caves , Bangkok, 2007.
Murphy, S., “ Sema  Stones in Lower Myanmar and Northeast 
Thailand: A Comparison,” in: N. Revire & S. Murphy, eds., 
Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeology , Bangkok, 2014, 
353–371.
Mya (Mra), U. ( Ūḥ), Rheḥ hoṅḥ aut khvak rup pv āḥ chaṅḥ tu 
tau myāḥ (Votive Tablets of Burma), 2 vols., Yangon, 1961.
Myint Aung, “The Excavations of Ayethama and Winka,” 
SMH  1, 1999, 17–64.
Nihom, M., “The Ma ṇḍala of Candi Gumpung (Sumatra) and 
the  Indo-Tibetan Vajra śekharatantra,” IIJ 41, 1998, 245–254.
Niyada Lawsunthara, ed., Prachum charuk wat phra chetu-
phon  (Wat Phra Chetuphon Inscriptions), Bangkok, 2001.
Nyein Maung ( Ṅrimḥ Moṅ) et al. , eds., Rheḥ hoṅḥ mran m ā 
kyok cā myāḥ (Ancient Burmese Inscriptions), 6 vols., Yan-
gon, 1972–2013.
Orawin Likhitwisetkul, Chang ayutthaya nai muang phama 
raman  (Ayutthaya Artisans in Burma), Bangkok, 2010.
Orlina, R., “Epigraphical Evidence for the Cult of 
Mahāpratisarā in the Philippines,” JIABS  35/1–2, 2012, 159–169.
Pan Hla, N., & E. Guillon, “A Mon Copper Plate in the 
National Library, Bangkok,” JBuRS  55/1–2, 1972, 9–18.
Pe Maung Tin & G.H. Luce, “Inscriptions of Burma, Portfolio 
1: Pagan Shwegugyi (Pali) Inscription,” BBHRC  1/1, 1960, 
908–911.Penth, H., “The Date of the Wat B āng Sanuk Inscription,” JSS 
84/2, 1996, 5–16.
Penth, H., Kham charuk thi than phra phuttarup nai nakhon 
chiang mai  (Inscribed Buddha Images in Chiang Mai), 
Bangkok, 1976.
Penth, H., “Die Inschriften des L ān Nā Thai – Ein Überblick,” 
ZDMG  Suppl. 3/2, 1975, 908–911.
Penth, H., et al., Prachum charuk lanna/Corpus of L ān Nā 
Inscriptions , 15 vols., Chiang Mai, 1997–2013.
Poerbatjaraka, R.N., “De Inscriptie van het  Mah ākṣobhya- 
beeld te Simpang (Soerabaya),” BKI 78, 1922, 426–462.
Pou, S., Nouvelles inscriptions du Cambodge, I–IV , Paris, 1989–2011.
 Prachum sila charuk  (Corpus of Stone Inscriptions), publ. 
Office of the Secretary to the Prime Minister, 8 vols., Bang-
kok, 1924–2004.
Prasert Na Nagara, Charuk lanna  (Lanna Inscriptions), 4 vols., 
Bangkok, 1992–2008.
Prasert Na Nagara & A.B. Griswold, Epigraphic and Historical 
Studies , Bangkok, 1992.
Quaritch Wales, H.G., “Archaeological Research,” JMBRAS  18, 
1940, 1–85.
Reichle, N., Violence and Serenity: Late Buddhist Sculpture 
from Indonesia , Honolulu, 2007.
Revire, N., “Dv āravatī and Zhenla in the Seventh–Eighth 
Centuries: A Transregional Ritual Complex,” JSEAS , forth-
coming a.
Revire, N., “Some Newly Discovered Tablets from Peninsu-
lar Thailand,” in: Proceedings of the 1st SPAFA Conference 
on Southeast Asian Archaeology, Chonburi, Thailand,  
May 2013 , forthcoming b.
Revire, N., “Glimpses of Buddhist Practices and Rituals in 
Dvāravatī and Its Neighbouring Cultures,” in: N. Revire & 
S. Murphy, eds., Before Siam: Essays in Art and Archaeol-
ogy, Bangkok, 2014, 241–271.
Revire, N., review of Bandhit Liuchaichan et al. , “Raignan 
phonkanwichai rueang kanpradisathan phraphutthasasa na 
chak lankathawip nai dindaen prathet thai samai wat-
thanatham thawarawadi” (Research Report on the Estab-
lishment of Sri Lankan Buddhism in Thailand during the 
Dvāravatī Period, Bangkok, 2010), Aséanie  29, 2012, 151–157.
 Rheḥ hoṅḥ sutesana ññvhan kr āḥ reḥ van e* [.  . .] nhac khyup 
acī raṅ khaṁ cā (Report of the Director, Archaeological 
Survey), publ. Department of Archaeology, Yangon, 1959, 
1960, 1965.
Sander, L., “Confusion of Terms and Terms of Confusion in 
Indian Palaeography,” in: K. Preisendanz, ed., Expand-
ing and Merging Horizons: Contributions to South Asian 
and Cross-cultural Studies in Commemoration of Wilhelm 
Halbfass , Denkschriften ÖAW,  Philosophisch-historische 
Klasse 351, Vienna, 2007, 121–139.
Sanderson, A., “The Śaiva Religion among the Khmers  
(Part I),” BEFEO  90–91, 2003–2004, 349–462.
San Win, “Dating the Hpayahtaung Pyu Stone Urn Inscrip-
tion,” MHRJ  11, 2003, 15–22.
Sarkar, H.B., Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java (Corpus Inscriptio -
num Javanicarum), up to 928 A.D., 2 vols., Calcutta, 1971–1972.
Schweyer, A.-V., “La royauté au Camp ā d’après les inscrip-
tions,” in: D. Brac de La Perrière & M.-L. Reiniche, eds., Les 
apparences du monde: Royautés hindoues et bouddhiques 
de l’Asie du Sud et du Sud-Est , ÉT 15, Paris, 2006, 119–183.

--- [Page 21] ---
1008 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia
Schweyer, A.-V., “Buddhism in Čampā,” Moussons  13–14, 
2009, 309–337.
Sein Maung U (Cin Mo ṅ Ūḥ), Mran m ā nuiṅ ṅaṃ lak rveḥ caṅ 
rheḥ hoṅḥ khoṅḥ loṅḥ cā myāḥ (Selected Bell Inscriptions 
from Burma), Yangon, 2014.
Shafer, R., “Further Analysis of the Pyu Inscriptions,” HJAS  
7/4, 1943, 313–366.
Sharrock, P.D., “Berlin’s 1182–86 ce Bodhisattva ‘Sunlight’ or 
‘Moonlight,’” IAZ 15, 2011, 31–40.
Sharrock, P.D., “K īrtipaṇḍita and the Tantras,” Udaya  10, 2012, 
203–237.
Shorto, H.L., A Dictionary of the Mon Inscriptions from the 
Sixth to the Sixteenth Centuries , LOS 24, Oxford, 1971.
Shorto, H.L., “The Devatā Plaques of the Ananda Base-
ment,” in: A.B. Griswold & Ba Shin, eds., Essays O ffered to 
G.H. Luce by His Colleagues and Friends in Honour of His 
Seventy-Fifth Birthday , 2 vols., ArtAs Supplementum 23, 
Ascona, 1966, 156–165.
Sircar, D.C., “Bhaik ṣukī Inscription on a Bronze Buddha 
Image from the Pagoda of  Shin-Ma-Taung (Burma),” JAIH  
10, 1977, 110–111.
Sircar, D.C., “Indological Notes, 21: R.C. Majumdar’s Chronol-
ogy of the P āla Kings, 22: Two Inscriptions from Prome 
and Vesali in Burma,” JAIH  9, 1976, 200–218.
Sircar, D.C., “Fragmentary  Copper-Plate Grant from Arakan,” 
EpInd  37, 1967, 61–66.
Skilling, P., “An Untraced Buddhist Verse Inscription from 
(Pen)Insular Southeast Asia,” in: C. Lammerts, ed.,  
Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early Modern South-
east Asia , Singapore, 2015, 18–79.
Skilling, P., “L’énigme de Si Thep,” in: P. Baptiste & T. Zéphir, 
eds., Dvāravatī: aux sources du bouddhisme en Thaïlande , 
Paris, 2009, 117–125.
Skilling, P., “Buddhist Sealings in Thailand and Southeast 
Asia: Iconography, Function, and Ritual Context,” in: 
E.A. Bacus, I.C. Glover & P.D. Sharrock, eds., Interpreting 
Southeast Asia’s Past: Monument, Image and Text , Singa-
pore, 2008a, 248–262.
Skilling, P., Past Lives of the Buddha: Wat Si Chum: Art, Archi-
tecture, and Inscriptions , Bangkok, 2008b.
Skilling, P., “‘Buddhist Sealings’: Re flections on Terminol-
ogy, Motivation, Donors’ Status,  School-A ffiliation, and 
 Print-Technology,” in: C. Jarrige & V. Lefèvre, eds., South 
Asian Archaeology 2001: Proceedings of the Sixteenth Inter-
national Conference of the European Association of South 
Asian Archaeologists, Held in Collège de France, Paris, 2–6 
July 2001 , Paris, 2005a, 677–685.
Skilling, P., review of Stargardt, 2000, AP 44/2, 2005b, 386–390.
Skilling, P., “Traces of the Dharma: Preliminary Reports on 
Some ye dhamm ā and ye dharm ā Inscriptions from Main-
land  South-East Asia,” BEFEO  90–91, 2003–2004, 273–287.
Skilling, P., “Some Citation Inscriptions from  South-East 
Asia,” JPTS  27, 2002, 159–175.
Skilling, P., “The Place of  South-East Asia in Buddhist Stud-
ies,” BgKe  30, 2000, 19–43.
Skilling, P., “A Buddhist Inscription from Go Xoai, South-
ern Vietnam and Notes towards a Classi fication of Ye 
Dharmā Inscriptions,” in: 80 Pi Śāstrācāry Dr. Pra ḥsert 
Ṇa Nagara: Ruam Pada Khwam Vij ākāra Dan Charük Lae Ekasāraporāṇa (Eighty Years: A Collection of Articles 
on Epigraphy and Ancient Documents Published on the 
Occasion of the Celebration of the 80th Birthday of Prof. 
Dr. Prasert Na Nagara), Bangkok, 1999, 171–187.
Skilling, P., “New P āli Inscriptions from  South-East Asia,” 
JPTS  23, 1997a, 123–57.
Skilling, P., “The Advent of Therav āda Buddhism to Mainland 
 South-East Asia,” JIABS  20/1, 1997b, 93–107.
Skilling, P., W.A. Southworth & Tr ần Kỳ Phương, “A Buddhist  
Stele from M ỹ Thạnh in the Phú Yên Province of Central  
Vietnam,” in: L. Prematilleka, Phisit Charoenwongsa,  
K. Sankarnarayan & Timbul Haryono, eds., Abhinandana-
mālā: Nandana Chutiwongs Felicitation Volume , Bangkok,  
2010, 487–498.
Soutif, D., “Organisation religieuse et profane du temple 
khmer du viième au xiiième siècle,” diss., Université Sor-
bonne Nouvelle, Paris 3, 2009.
Speijer, J.S., “Eene Buddhistische Inscriptie A fkomstig van 
Java (tweede artikel),” VMKAW Afdeeling Letterkunde  4/6, 
1904, 253–262.
Speijer, J.S., “Eene Buddhistische Inscriptie A fkomstig van 
Java,” VMKAW Afdeeling Letterkunde  4/6, 1903, 138–144.
Stargardt, J., Tracing Thought through Things: The Oldest 
Pali Texts and the Early Buddhist Archaeology of India and 
Burma , Amsterdam, 2000.
Stargardt, J., “The Oldest Known Pali Texts,  5th–6th Century; 
Results of the Cambridge Symposium on the Pyu Golden 
Pali Text from Śrī Kṣetra, 18–19 April 1995,” JPTS  21, 1995, 
199–213.
Stein Callenfels, P.V. van, Epigraphia Balica I , VKBGKW 66, 
Batavia, 1926.
Stutterheim, W.F., Oudheden van Bali , vol. I: Het oude rijk van 
Pedjeng , 2 pts., Singaradja, 1929–1930.
Sundberg, J.R., “A Buddhist Mantra Recovered from the Ratu 
Baka Plateau: A Preliminary Study of Its Implications for 
 Śailendra-Era Java,” BKI 159, 2003, 163–188.
Suwedi Montana, “Melaksanakan pesan sang Empu,” KMA  9, 
1990, 23–39.
Swe (Chvai), U ( Ūḥ), Nhac amaññ p ā so mran m ā rheḥ hoṅḥ 
maṅ cā myāḥ (Ancient Burmese Ink Inscriptions Bearing 
Dates and Names), Yangon, 2001.
Szántó, P.-D., “A note on the Sab B āk inscription (K. 1158),” 
forthcoming.
Taw Sein Ko, Original Inscriptions Collected by King Bodaw-
paya in Upper Burma , Rangoon, 1913.
Taw Sein Ko, Inscriptions Copied from the Stones Collected 
by King Bodawpaya and Placed near the Arakan Pagoda, 
Mandalay , 2 vols., Rangoon, 1897.
Taw Sein Ko, “A Preliminary Study of the Kalyani Inscrip-
tions of King Dhammaceti, 1476 A.D.,” IA 22, 1893.
Taw Sein Ko & C. Duroiselle, Epigraphia Birmanica , vol. 1/1, 
Rangoon, 1919.
Terwiel, B., The Ram Khamhaeng Inscription: The Fake That 
Did Not Come True , Gossenberg, 2010.
Than Tun, “An Original Inscription Dated 10 September 1223 
That King Badon Copied on 27 October 1785,” in: P. Pich-
ard & F. Robinne, Études Birmanes en hommage à Denise 
Bernot , ÉT 9, Paris, 1998, 37–55.
Titi Surti Nastiti, Prasasti Sobh āmṛta, Jakarta, 2007.

--- [Page 22] ---
 Epigraphy : Southeast  Asia  1009
Tournier, V., “Mah ākāśyapa, His Lineage, and the Wish for 
Buddhahood: Reading Anew the Bodhgay ā Inscriptions of 
Mahānāman,” IIJ 57, 2014, 1–60.
Tun Aung Chain, “The Kings of the Hpayahtaung Urn Inscrip-
tion,” MHRJ  11, 2003, 1–14.
Tun Nyein, Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya, and Ava , Rangoon, 
1899.
Tun Nyein, “Maunggun Gold Plates,” EpInd  5, 1898, 101–102.
Veidlinger, D., Spreading the Dhamma: Writing, Orality, and  
Textual Transmission in Buddhist Northern Thailand , 
Honolulu, 2007.
Vicittasiri & Kum ārābhivaṁsa, Mran m ā nuiṅ ṅaṁ kyok thak 
akkharā taṅ piṭakat suṁḥ puṁ pā uniṁEDăi tau aṭṭhakathā nhaṅ. 
ṭīkā tui. e* m ātikā myāḥ (Burmese Inscriptions of the 
Tipiṭaka, Commentaries, and Subcommentaries), Yangon, 
2000.
Vickery, M., “The Khmer Inscriptions of Tenasserim: A Rein-
terpretation,” JSS 61/1, 1971, 51–70.
Vincent, B., “Nouvelle étude du Loke śvara Khmer du Musée 
National de Colombo (Sri Lanka),” JA 68, 2013, 27–38.
Wade, G., “Beyond the Southern Borders: Southeast Asia  
in Chinese Texts to the Ninth Century,” in: J. Guy, Lost 
Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist Sculpture of Early Southeast 
Asia , New York, 2014, 25–31.
Wade, G., “The Ming Shi-Lu  as a Source for Thai History – 
Fourteenth to Seventeenth Centuries,” JSEAS  31/2, 2000, 
249–294.
Wibowo, A.S., “Prasasti Ālasantan Tahun 861 Śaka,” KMA  2/3, 
1979, 3–51.
Wisseman Christie, J., “Revisiting Early Mataram,” in: M.J. 
Klokke & K.R. van Kooij, eds., Fruits of Inspiration: Studies in Honour of Prof. J.G. de Casparis, Retired Professor of the 
Early History and Archeology of South and Southeast Asia 
at the University of Leiden, the Netherlands, on the Occasion 
of His 85th Birthday , GIS 11, Groningen, 2001, 25–55.
Woodward, H., “The Temple of Dong Duong and the 
Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra,” in: ManjuShree, ed., From Beyond 
the Eastern Horizon: Essays in Honour of Professor Lokesh 
Chandra , ŚPS 638, New Delhi, 2011, 33–42.
Woodward, H., “Bianhong, Mastermind of Borobudur?” PW 
3/11, 2009, 26–60.
Woodward, H., The Art and Architecture of Thailand: From 
Prehistoric Times through the Thirteenth Century , HdO 
3/14, Leiden, 2005.
Woodward, H., “Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia in the 
Light of Recent Scholarship,” JSEAS  35/2, 2004, 329–354.
Websites 
Corpus of the Inscriptions of Camp ā:
http://isaw.nyu.edu/publications/inscriptions/campa/
index.html.
Corpus of Lan Na Inscriptions: lanna.sri.cmu.ac.th/jaruek.
The Inscriptions in Thailand Database: sac.or.th/databases/
inscriptions.
Arlo Griffiths  
D. Christian  Lammerts