--- [Page 1] ---


--- [Page 2] ---
The ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute (formerly Institute of Southeast Asian Studies) is an autonomous organization 
established in 1968. It is a regional centre dedicated to the study of socio-political, security, and economic trends 
and developments in Southeast Asia and its wider geostrategic and economic environment. The Institute’s 
research programmes are grouped under Regional Economic Studies (RES), Regional Strategic and Political Studies (RSPS), and Regional Social and Cultural Studies (RSCS). The Institute is also home to the ASEAN 
Studies Centre (ASC), the Singapore APEC Study Centre, and the Temasek History Research Centre (THRC).
ISEAS Publishing, an established academic press, has issued more than 2,000 books and journals. It is 
the largest scholarly publisher of research about Southeast Asia from within the region. ISEAS Publishing works with many other academic and trade publishers and distributors to disseminate important research and analyses from and about Southeast Asia to the rest of the world.
00_CreSouth V2_FM_4P_25Jul22.indd   2 25/7/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 3] ---


--- [Page 4] ---
First published in Singapore in 2022 by ISEAS Publishing
ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute
30 Heng Mui Keng TerraceSingapore 119614
E-mail: publish@iseas.edu.sg
Website : http://bookshop.iseas.edu.sg
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute.
© 2022 ISEAS  – Yusof Ishak Institute
The responsibility for facts and opinions in this publication rests exclusively with the authors and their interpretations do not necessarily reflect the views or the policy of the publishers or their supporters.
ISEAS Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Name(s):  Acri, Andrea, 1981-, editor. | Sharrock, Peter D., editor. 
Title:  The creative south : Buddhist and Hindu art in mediaeval maritime Asia / edited by Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock.
Description:  Singapore : ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute, 2022. | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers:  ISBN 978-981-4951-48-7 (soft cover ; Volume 1) | ISBN 978-981-4951-49-4 (pdf ; Volume 1) | 
ISBN 978-981-4951-51-7 (soft cover ; Volume 2) | ISBN 978-981-4951-52-4 (pdf ; Volume 2)
Subjects:  LCSH: Art, Medieval—Asia—History. | Buddhist art—Asia—History. | Hindu art—Asia—History.
Classification: LCC N8191 A8C91
Cover design by Lee Meng HuiIndex compiled by Raffaie NaharTypeset by International Typesetters Pte LtdPrinted in Singapore by Markono Print Media Pte Ltd
00_CreSouth V2_FM_4P_25Jul22.indd   4 25/7/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 5] ---
Dedicated to the memory of 
Yury Khokhlov and Roy E. Jordaan
00_CreSouth V2_FM_4P_25Jul22.indd   5 25/7/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 6] ---
00_CreSouth V2_FM_4P_25Jul22.indd   6 25/7/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 7] ---
1. Introduction: Volume 2: Odisha and Java 1
 Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock
PART I:
FROM ODISHA TO JAVA
2. Saviour ‘at the Time of Death’: Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First  7
 Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites
 Sonali Dhingra
3. Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍala s in Maritime Asia: Epigraphic and  27
 Iconographic Evidence from Odisha and Java (8th–11th Century)
 Umakanta Mishra
PART II:
JAVA AND ITS TRANSLOCAL ECHOES
4. The Scheme of Borobudur 55
 Hudaya Kandahjaya
5. Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko: Its Possible Function and Association with  74
 the Mediaeval Sri Lankan Monastery at Anurādhapura
 Saran Suebsantiwongse
6. The Conqueror of the Three Worlds: The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied  94
 Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains
 Michel Gauvain
7. The Social Context of the Central Javanese Temples of Kalasan and Prambanan  134
 (8th–9th Century CE)
 Mimi SavitriContEnt s
00_CreSouth V2_FM_4P_25Jul22.indd   7 25/7/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 8] ---
Contentsviii
8. Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan 145
 Roy E. Jordaan
9. Hydro-architectonic Conceptualizations in Central Javanese, Khmer,  167
 and South Indian Religious Architecture: The Prambanan Temple 
 as a Sahasraliṅga  Mechanism for the Consecration of Water
 Jeffrey Sundberg
10. New Archaeological Data from Mount Penanggungan, East Java 209
 Hadi Sidomulyo
The Contributors  246
Index  248
00_CreSouth V2_FM_4P_25Jul22.indd   8 25/7/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 9] ---
Chapter 1
Introduction
Volume 2: Odisha and Java
Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock
This edited volume is the second of two 
forming an anthology that programmati -
cally reconsiders the creative contribution 
of the littoral and insular regions of Maritime Asia 
to shaping new paradigms in the Buddhist and 
Hindu art and architecture of the mediaeval Asian 
world. Both volumes, inscribing themselves in the 
same intellectual trajectory of the edited volume 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons published by 
ISEAS (Acri 2016), bring together new interdisci-
plinary research that contributes to a new sense of 
the historical role of Maritime Asia. Overall, they  
aim to recalibrate the importance of these innova -
tions in art and architecture, thereby highlighting 
the cultural creativity of the monsoon-influenced 
southern rim of the Asian landmass. They also 
make a case for the importance of comparative-
ly studying those phenomena from the prism 
of intra-Asian connections, taking into account 
circulatory dynamics while remaining anchored 
to the disciplinary traditions specializing on the 
various regions that constitute the rich cultural 
mosaic of Maritime Asia. 
Most of the proposed studies stem from 
papers presented in two summer programmes 
held in East Java in 2016 (co-organized by the 
SOAS Southeast Asia Art Academic Programme 
[SAAAP] and the Nalanda-Sriwijaya Centre of 
ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute) and in Central Java 
in 2017 (co-organized by the SOAS SAAAP and 
Universitas Gadjah Mada).1 These scholarly gath-
1. Both programmes were generously (co-)funded by the 
Alphawood Foundation in Chicago. The Alphawood Foun -
dation has also significantly contributed to the funding of 
the present publication.erings aimed at rediscovering the influence of the  
Buddhist and Hindu paradigms of mediaeval king -
doms adjoining the maritime trade route. With 
contributions from leading local and international 
scholars, the anthology expands on themes of in-
novation and transfer in the unique monuments, 
icons, and rituals developed in South India and 
Sri Lanka, Sumatra, the Malay Peninsula, Java, 
and the Khmer and Cam domains that strongly 
impacted Buddhist and Hindu art, architecture, 
and religious culture in India, Nepal, Tibet, and 
China, and incite to deeper explorations. 
Having discussed the intellectual framework 
informing this collective body of work in the In-
troduction to Volume One (Acri and Sharrock 
2022), containing nine studies mainly dealing with 
intra-Asian transfers2 and mainland Southeast 
Asia,3 we will now summarize the nine studies 
contained in this volume, mainly covering the 
regions of Odisha and Java. 
Part I, ‘From Odisha to Java’, consists of two 
chapters focusing on the eastern Indian littoral 
state of Odisha and its longstanding overseas mar -
itime links with insular Southeast Asia and Java 
in particular. Chapter 2, ‘Saviour “at the Time of 
Death”: Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First 
Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites’, by Sonali 
Dhingra focuses on the Bodhisattva Amoghapāśa 
as an important cultic figure at several contempo -
raneous eastern Indian Buddhist establishments in 
Bihar and Odisha. Highlighting the popularity of 
2. By Iain Sinclair; Yury Khokhlov; and Peter Sharrock.
3. By Jinah Kim; Swati Chemburkar; Shivani Kapoor, 
Swati Chemburkar, Andrea Acri, Olivier Cunin; Mya Chau; 
Mai Bùi Diệu Linh; and Tr ần Kỳ Phương.
01_Intro CreSouthV2_5P_29July22.indd   1 29/7/22   3:08 PM

--- [Page 10] ---
Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock2
this Bodhisattva over a large part of the Buddhist 
world, the author suggests that the likely reason 
behind the widespread relevance of Amoghapāśa’s 
cult was his specific role associated with death and 
afterlife. Focusing on extant sculpture recovered 
from archaeological sites in Odisha, particular -
ly Ratnagiri, as well as textual records, she dis -
cusses the devotional and cultic significance of 
Amoghapāśa as a ‘saviour at the time of death’, 
suggesting that through a fresh interpretation of 
the relevance and meaning of his defining attrib-
ute, the pāśa, we can understand the association 
of Amoghapāśa with death, saving the dead at 
deathbed, and post-mortem rites in India and 
across Asia between the 8th and 10th centuries. 
Chapter 3, ‘Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas 
in Maritime Asia: Epigraphic and Iconographic 
Evidence from Odisha and Java (8th–11th Century)’ 
by Umakanta Misra deals with the eastward spread 
of Esoteric Buddhist Tantra, of which architectural 
and sculptural maṇḍalas were a constitutive part, 
from the Indian subcontinent to other regions 
of Maritime Asia. This study explores the devel-
opment of maṇḍalas based on Caryā-  and Yo -
ga-tantras in the architectural and iconographic 
programmes of the Buddhist sites of Ratnagiri, 
Udayagiri, and Lalitagiri, situated in Odisha. In 
the first part, it argues that Odisha emerged as 
an early centre of Esoteric Buddhism, presenting 
epigraphic, sculptural, and architectural evidence 
of maṇḍalas that Buddhist monks transmitted 
to Southeast and East Asia. In the second part, it 
highlights similarities between the Odishan archi -
tectural and art historical remains and analogous 
monuments and objects from Buddhist sites of 
Central Java. 
The remaining seven chapters of Volume Two 
are presented in Part II, ‘Java and its Translocal 
Echoes’, entirely devoted to Javanese instantia -
tions of Buddhist and Hindu art and architecture 
studied from a comparative perspective that locate 
the island at the centre of the vibrant traffic of 
religious ideas, practices, and artistic styles that 
characterized mediaeval Maritime Asia. Chapter 
4, ‘The Scheme of Borobudur’, by Hudaya Kan -
dahjaya builds on previous work on the meaning 
of the Central Javanese Buddhist monument, and proposes an enhanced solution to this problem by 
analysing the monument’s shape and layout in the 
light of meaningful numerological patterns in the 
context of Buddhist doctrine. It includes a brief 
survey of previous interpretations, and a detailed 
discussion of the author’s hypothesis on the basis 
of relevant Sanskrit and Old Javanese texts as well 
as inscriptions matching the symbolic and icono-
graphical features of the Javanese monument.
Another study devoted to Central Javanese 
Buddhist architecture is Chapter 5, ‘Candi Pem-
bakaran at Ratu Boko: Its Possible Function and 
Association with the Mediaeval Sri Lankan Monas -
tery at Anurādhapura’, by Saran Suebsantiwongse. 
It proposes a new interpretation of the square, 
two-terraced platform with a deep hole at the 
centre found just steps away from the entrance 
to the second enclosure on the north side of the 
Ratu Boko complex. The purpose of this struc -
ture, now known as Candi Pembakaran, remains 
unclear, and opinions range from its former 
use as a crematorium to a sacrificial fire pit. A 
fragment of inscription unearthed near the en -
trance of the second enclosure, revealing that the 
complex was modelled after the Abhayagirivihāra 
in Anurādhapura (Sri Lanka), the existence of a 
sacred Bodhi shrine at Abhayagirivihāra, and the 
shape and location of the structure near a water 
source, all suggest that the structure at Ratu Boko 
might have had the same function, owing to the 
fact that the Bodhi shrine is one of the three parts 
of a typical Buddhist monastery.
Chapter 6, ‘The Conqueror of the Three 
Worlds: The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied 
Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural 
Remains’, by Michel Gauvain investigates the dif-
fusion and nature of the cult of Trailokyavijaya in 
Java. This wrathful manifestation of Vajrapāṇi, also 
called Vajrahūṃkāra and sometimes described as 
a transformation of Vajrasattva (and thus identical 
in essence with the Buddha Mahāvairocana), or as 
an emanation of the Buddha Akṣobhya, belongs 
to a category of beings who have been defined as 
‘wrathful destroyers of obstacles’ (krodha-vigh -
nāntaka), a class of esoteric deities whose task 
is not merely the protection of the devotees or 
the intimidation of recalcitrant beings, but also 
01_Intro CreSouthV2_5P_29July22.indd   2 29/7/22   3:08 PM

--- [Page 11] ---
Introduction: Volume 2: Odisha and Java3
the removal of external and internal hindrances 
and the transmutation of ignorance into wisdom. 
While the cult of the deity spanned almost the 
entire Asian continent over many centuries, it 
appears to have received considerable popularity 
in Java in the 8th–11th centuries. 
Chapter 7, ‘The Social Context of the Central 
Javanese Temples of Kalasan and Prambanan 
(8th–9th Century CE)’, by Mimi Savitri explores 
the issues of how the Buddhist temple of Kalasan 
and the Hindu complex of Prambanan were ini-
tiated, executed, and maintained. Building on the 
realization that art historians have often focused 
on the aesthetic and religious aspects of Javanese 
temple complexes, the author notes that they have 
often neglected the social contexts of the Javanese 
communities in the creation and maintenance of 
such sanctuaries, as well as their social life. The 
chapter combines research on the archaeologi -
cal and architectural features with an analysis of 
Old Javanese inscriptions related to the temples 
in order to cast light on the social dynamics of 
the period in which the temples were built and 
flourished.
The remaining three chapters focus on the 
Hindu art and architecture of Central and East 
Java.  The posthumously published Chapter 8, ‘Sītā 
as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan’, by 
the late Roy Jordaan deals with Sītā as depicted 
in the Rāmāyaṇa bas-reliefs on the inner side of 
the balustrade wall enclosing the ambulatories of 
the three main shrines of the temple complex of 
Prambanan. One of the riddles that Sītā presents 
us with at this temple site is her background, that is 
to say her birth and parentage. This matter appears 
to be particularly relevant for the interpretation 
of the twelfth bas-relief scene on the Brahmā 
temple that shows Rāvaṇa’s corpse surrounded 
by a few women. Perusal of the literature shows 
that in numerous post-Vālmīki tellings Sītā is 
represented as the daughter of Rāvaṇa with his 
main consort Mandodarī. Although in India, 
the land of origin of the Rāma-story, this idea is 
not completely unknown, this representation is 
best known among widely separated peoples in 
regions like Tibet, Khotan (Turkmenistan), much 
of mainland Southeast Asia, as well as Java. This fact also highlights the innovative character of 
the ‘periphery’.
Chapter 9, ‘Hydro-architectonic Conceptual-
izations in Central Javanese, Khmer, and South 
Indian Religious Architecture: The Prambanan 
Temple as a Sahasraliṅga (1,000 liṅgas) Mech -
anism for the Consecration of Water’, by Jeffrey 
Sundberg argues that the Prambanan Śaiva temple 
complex served principally as a site for the pro -
duction of large quantities of consecrated water 
by flowing over a towering erect statue of Śiva 
mounted on a praṇāla. Building on the thesis of 
Roy Jordaan that the entire inner courtyard of 
Candi Loro Jonggrang was intermittently flooded 
to create a giant tīrtha at the sacred site, the author 
brings new evidence from the temple complex 
itself as well as sites in Cambodia (i.e. the ‘pu -
rification sculptures’ carved into the rocky beds 
of the natural river at Kbal Spean) and Sri Lanka. 
The writer proposes that the curious ribbed and 
spike-tipped bulbous finials that ascend the mon-
uments spires are in fact liṅgas, of which there are 
approximately 1,000 at Prambanan. The flutings 
on these finials, which direct monsoon rains into 
huge makara-gargoyle spouts that pour water into 
the courtyard, thus appear to depict in architec-
tural form a giant liṅga and the Descent of the 
Ganges myth. The scale of this vast and elegant 
holy water production monument was unrivalled 
in premodern Asia and counts among the original 
conceptual reformulations of Indic ideas under-
taken by the Javanese.
The collection is closed by Chapter 10, ‘New 
Archaeological Data from Mount Penanggungan, 
East Java’ by Hadi Sidomulyo, which presents a 
comprehensive survey of the plethora of archae-
ological sites located on Mount Penanggungan, a 
five-peaked extinct volcano lying in the province 
of East Java near the city of Surabaya. This moun-
tain, which came to be identified with the sacred 
five-peaked Mahāmeru of Hindu and Buddhist 
tradition, was regarded by the Javanese as a locus 
of supreme sanctity, and was located in the prox-
imity of the former Majapahit capital. The chapter 
describes the remains that were first surveyed by 
early Dutch and Indonesian archaeologists, then 
documents the extraordinary wealth of additional 
01_Intro CreSouthV2_5P_29July22.indd   3 29/7/22   3:08 PM

--- [Page 12] ---
Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock4
sites discovered in recent years, contextualizing 
them against the background of East Javanese 
history and epigraphic and textual sources of the 
Majapahit period.
References
Acri, Andrea (ed.). 2016. Esoteric Buddhism in 
Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak 
Institute.
Acri, Andrea and Peter Sharrock. 2022. ‘Intro -
duction. Volume 1: Intra-Asian Transfers and 
Mainland Southeast Asia’, in Andrea Acri and 
Peter Sharrock (eds.), The Creative South: Bud -
dhist and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime 
Asia. Volume One, pp. 1–6. Singapore: ISEAS 
– Yusof Ishak Institute.
01_Intro CreSouthV2_5P_29July22.indd   4 29/7/22   3:08 PM

--- [Page 13] ---
part I
FROM ODISHA TO JAV A
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   5 23/7/22   2:43 PM

--- [Page 14] ---
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   6 23/7/22   2:43 PM

--- [Page 15] ---
Chapter 2
Saviour ‘at the Time of Death’: 
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium  
Odishan Buddhist Sites
Sonali Dhingra
In the late first millennium, bodhisattva 
Amoghapāśa (literally, ‘whose noose is unfail-
ing’),1 a special appearance of Avalokiteśvara, 
was an important cultic figure at several contempo -
raneous Eastern Indian Buddhist establishments in 
Bihar and Odisha.2 At the same time, as surviving 
visual as well as textual evidence suggests, this 
bodhisattva was favoured over a large part of the 
Buddhist world in Japan, China, Southeast Asia, 
and Nepal.3 After the first millennium, the cult of 
this bodhisattva continued to gain greater popular -
ity during later centuries in areas where Buddhism 
flourished. It is clear that sculpture representing 
bodhisattva Amoghapāśa was considered to have 
immense cultic efficacy across the Buddhist world. 
Why did this particular aspect of bodhisattva Ava-
lokiteśvara gain distinctive eminence at Buddhist 
sites across Asia during the mediaeval period?
The likely reason behind the widespread rele-
vance of Amoghapāśa’s cult was his general role 
as a protector, along with his specific role associ-
ated with death and the afterlife. Janice Leoshko 
(1985: 135) briefly made an insightful suggestion 
regarding Amoghapāśa’s funerary function at 
Gayā (Bihar, India). Nancy Tingley (2006: 76), too, 
pointed to the possible mortuary associations of 
1. Meisezahl (1967: 462) interprets amogha as ‘efficacious’. 
2. See Leoshko 1985; Hock 1987; Gail 2001; Donaldson (2001: 
200–205); Bautze-Picron (2014: 107–114). Pia Brancaccio 
(2011: 143) noted one unique two-armed Avalokiteśvara, 
holding a pāśa, in the circa 6th century excavation at  
Cave 2 Aurangabad. 
3. Meisezahl 1962, 1967; Pal 1966–1967; Lunsingh Scheurleer 
and Klokke 1988; Tingley [Hock] 2006; Wong 2007; Reichle 
2007; Guy 2014; Griffiths 2014; Sinclair 2022.this bodhisattva at Ratnagiri (Jajpur district) in 
Odisha. Focusing on extant sculpture recovered 
from archaeological sites in Odisha, particularly 
Ratnagiri, as well as textual records, this chapter 
will discuss the devotional and cultic significance4 
of Amoghapāśa as a ‘saviour at the time of death’. 
While attending to the perceived role of this bo -
dhisattva in early mediaeval South Asia, I will 
consider the physical locations of the large-scale 
stone sculptures of Amoghapāśa discovered at 
Ratnagiri, Odisha, and explore the development 
of this imagery within Indic iconography and fu-
nerary ritual. I will suggest that through a fresh 
interpretation of the relevance and meaning of 
his defining attribute, the pāśa, we can understand 
the association of Amoghapāśa with death-relat -
ed rituals in India between the 8th and early 10th 
centuries. Amoghapāśa was associated with ex -
tending lifespans, saving the dead at deathbed and 
post-mortem rites, making his worship prevalent 
amongst Buddhist communities across Asia. 
amoghapāśa images in india  
and beyond
The last quarter of the first millennium was a time 
of active patronage and expansion of Buddhist 
temple as well as monastic and pilgrimage sites 
in Eastern India (Leoshko 1988; Proser 2010).5 
4. For a recent discussion of the devotional and cultic 
aspects of Buddhist images from eastern India, see  
Bautze-Picron 2016: 165.
5. For pilgrimage to Buddhist sites see Leoshko 1988 and 
Proser 2010.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   7 23/7/22   2:43 PM

--- [Page 16] ---
Sonali Dhingra8
Sculptural productions at Buddhist sites became 
increasingly varied and larger in scale for devotion -
al purposes. Amoghapāśa images were made in the 
local artistic idiom at Gayā, Bodhgayā, Kurkihar, 
and Nālandā in Bihar, and further southeast in Rat -
nagiri and Udayagiri in the coastal state of Odisha.6 
As others have noted (Donaldson 2001: 202; Wong 
2007: 151), when comparing Amoghapāśa sculp -
tures of different provenance yet belonging to 
the same period we find a wide discrepancy in 
standard iconographic features such as the number 
of arms, attributes, and members of his retinue. 
Also, despite his popularity across Indian sites, it 
is interesting to note that Amoghapāśa is absent 
from the codified Esoteric Buddhist manuals of the 
12th century—the Sādhanamālā and the Niṣpan -
nayogāvalī.7
The iconography of Amoghapāśa images dating 
to the same time-period within the Indian sub -
continent is also inconsistent. For instance, the 
Nālandā set of noose-wielding Amoghapāśa is 
usually twelve-armed, the Kurkihar-Bodhgayā set 
is six-armed, while sculptures from Odisha are 
almost always four-armed.8 These deviations raise 
interesting questions regarding the transmission of 
iconographic types and decision-making at specific 
locales. Based on a detailed study of Amoghapāśa 
iconography from Odisha and its comparison 
with counterparts from Bihar, Thomas Donald -
son (2001: 202) concluded that ‘local traditions’ 
probably influenced ‘textual prescriptions’. We can 
6. Since the 5th century, Gayā (Gayā district, Bihar) is a 
site associated with śrāddha or ancestral rite ceremonies, 
and was considered to be a place of pan-Indian importance. 
Abundant images dating between the 8th through 12th 
centuries are enshrined in the Vishnupad Temple, built in the 
18th century (Asher 1988: 74). Avalokiteśvara’s universally 
compassionate cultic figure and his specific popularity in 
Bihar, especially at sites near Gayā—particularly at Pretaśila, 
located north of the city—has also been noted by Bautze-
Picron (2005: 414; see fn. 2 in particular for references 
discussing Amoghapāśa images at these sites in eastern 
India).
7. For examples of Amoghapāśa from Nālandā, Bodhgayā, 
and Kurkihar, see Leoshko 1985 and Bautze-Picron 2014: 
410–411, 416, 418. On the dissonance between Buddhist 
images and text, see Leoshko 1985 and Bautze-Picron 1989. 
8. With the exception of two examples noted by Donaldson 
(2001: 208).hypothesize that the regional and local variations 
in the envisioning of Amoghapāśa images may 
point to the varying degrees of acceptance of the 
newly introduced multi-armed convention, which 
becomes a popular way of depicting esoteric or 
tantric deities subsequently. We may also surmise 
that the incongruence in iconography suggests 
a period of local inventions of potent imageries 
of cultic deities during the late first millennium. 
Lastly, the 8th to 10th centuries may also be under -
stood as an incipient period of localized ‘visions’, 
more clearly articulated in the Esoteric Buddhist 
iconography of the 12th and 13th centuries (Kim 
2014a).
Surviving material evidence indicates the exist -
ence of a shared body of knowledge and practice 
around the cultic efficacy of this bodhisattva along 
the maritime corridors in the southern rim of Asia 
(Reichle 2007; Guy 2014: 250–260 and 2018; Sin -
clair 2022). Several metal images of Amoghapāśa 
were commissioned in Central Java during the 
8th and 9th centuries but seemed to end abrupt-
ly by the 10th century (Reichle 2007: 108).9 One 
stone image of Amoghapāśa dated to the circa 11th 
century was found in Bali, and we see a definite 
resurgence of the cult of Amoghapāśa with royal 
associations at Candi Jago (East Java) and Sumatra 
in the 13th century (ibid.: 110–111, 85–90). Sinclair 
(2022) makes a case for an origin of that icon from 
Śrīvijaya via a shared textual source or the possi-
bility of travelling metal images, ritual specialists, 
and artists. 
While focusing mainly on sculptures from Bihar 
and Bengal dating to the Pāla period, scholars 
have argued that after the 10th century, artistic 
ties between Northeastern India and Java became 
weaker. Images from the coastal state of Odisha, 
however, remain conspicuously under-utilized in 
discussions on Amoghapāśa. Unlike Odisha’s four-
armed examples, all identifiable Javanese imagery 
of Amoghapāśa is usually eight-armed in the 8th 
and 9th centuries (Reichle 2007: 108–109).10 At 
9. For metal images of Amoghapāśa, see the discussion 
in Reichle 2007: 108, and n. 54 for further references. 
10. Nancy Tingley (2006: 69) has suggested that some of 
the four-armed Avalokiteśvara reliefs from 9th-century 
Borobodur, Central Java, may be identified as Amoghapāśa. 
While the correspondence with the four-armed examples 
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   8 23/7/22   2:43 PM

--- [Page 17] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites9
first glance, investigating the parallels between 
Amoghapāśa images from Odisha with those from 
elsewhere in Maritime Asia does not show any 
clear parallels. Yet, some subtle similarities exist. 
Despite the discrepancy in the number of arms 
in examples from Odisha (four-armed examples) 
and Java (eight-armed examples), Donaldson 
observed that the alignment of attributes in sur -
viving Amoghapāśa appears to correspond with 
the eight-armed textual form rather than either 
the four or six-armed textual forms (Donaldson 
2001: 201–203, 208). To elaborate, we see that 
artists in Odisha favoured the same placement of 
objects in the hands of the bodhisattva—i.e., the 
varada- mudrā and lasso in the right hands and 
the kamaṇḍalu and lotus in the left hands (ibid.: 
203). The triḍaṇḍī, pustaka, triśūla, and the abha-  
ya-mudrā, often present in Javanese eight-armed 
forms, are absent in Amoghapāśa images from 
Odisha. Moreover, the abhaya- mudrā is altogeth-
er missing from bodhisattva imagery in Odisha, 
pointing to a systematized local convention. 
Even though they are temporally distant, it 
is instructive to note that stone sculptures of 
Amoghapāśa from Odisha and Java have a formally 
close stylistic relationship. Only a few scholars have 
directed attention to this issue.11 On comparing a 
circa mid-9th century Amoghapāśa from Ratnagiri 
(Fig. 2.1) with its more famous 13th-century Candi 
Jago counterpart (Fig. 2.2), we can notice a few  
similarities. Both sculptures are made in an 
over-human scale. They equally retain a simple 
overall aesthetic characterized by plain back-slabs 
and oval haloes. The Candi Jago sculpture has 
borne much damage—its head is now lost, and 
many hands and implements are today missing. 
of Avalokiteśvara from Odisha is intriguing, the absence 
of the pāśa  makes the identification uncertain. 
11. Ghosh (1933) and Williams (2007) made investiga -
tions into art historical connections between India and 
Indonesia. Willetts (1963: 18–19) also made the important 
suggestion that Odisha, located at the border of the Bay of 
Bengal, was culturally and artistically related to maritime 
networks. Willetts further argues that in spite of patron -
age ties between Nālandā and Java, and the discovery of 
Nālandā bronzes in Java, on formal, stylistic and techni -
cal grounds, art from Odisha is linked to the temples of 
Prambanan and Borobodur.
But we can notice that the bodies of both bodhisat -
tvas are soft and pliable, and their elegant hands 
tenderly hold on to their attributes in a similar 
fashion. Furthermore, the analogous arrangement 
of the pāśa in the right hands of the bodhisattva 
in both cases is also noteworthy. Finally, this sim-
ilarity is emphasized even further if we compare 
the paleography of Nāgarī-script Sanskrit inscrip-
tions on the plain back-slabs of the Candi Jago 
sculptures with the copper plate grants issues by 
the Ganga ruler Narasiṃhadeva (śaka 1217) (Kim 
2019; Kinney et al. 2003: 116).
At any rate, the conceptual connection between 
Amoghapāśa and death rituals, as others have 
pointed out, clearly remained important in 
both regions. A significant difference between 
Amoghapāśa sculpture from India and elsewhere 
is the involvement of royal patronage. While in 
Fig. 2.1: Amoghapāśa, c. mid-9th century. Khondalite. 
Ratnagiri, Odisha, India. Photo: Sonali Dhingra, 2017.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   9 23/7/22   2:43 PM

--- [Page 18] ---
Sonali Dhingra10
China, Japan, and East Java Amoghapāśa was as-
sociated with courtly commissions, in India we do 
not have evidence of a direct relationship of this 
cult with the ruling elite. In the following section, I 
will turn my attention to the visual evidence of the 
worship of Amoghapāśa from the Eastern Indian 
Buddhist establishment of Ratnagiri.
cultic associations of amoghapāśa 
images at ratnagiri, odisha
While the iconographic aspects of Buddhist images 
from Odisha have been explored in detail by 
scholars, their cultic status as illuminated by the 
physical and formal aspects have not been con -
sidered. A sub-set of at least seven over-life sized 
bodhisattva steles representing Amoghapāśa in a 
standing posture, dating between ca. 8th and 10th century, were discovered at Ratnagiri (Mitra 1981; 
Patnaik and Kar 2005) (Fig. 2.3).12 From the size of 
these sculptures, it seems reasonable to infer that 
Amoghapāśa was not a deity popular for quiet and 
personal contemplation, as very few small-scale 
images of his—for instance, in metal—have been 
recovered from any site in Eastern India.13 We 
can also see that in terms of sheer numbers and 
stature, no other deity received equal attention 
from artists and patrons at Ratnagiri.14 The earliest 
Amoghapāśa image produced at Ratnagiri dates 
to the 8th century and measures an impressive 1.9 
metres in height, despite a broken top (Fig. 2.4; see 
infra). Over the next two centuries, well over-life-
sized steles representing this bodhisattva were re-
peatedly commissioned, especially at Ratnagiri (Fig. 
2.3).15 The concentration of visually commanding 
sculptures of this bodhisattva exclusively at Ratna -
giri in Odisha denotes the increasing prominence 
of Amoghapāśa’s worship at this locale. 
In addition to commissioning increasingly 
imposing images of Amoghapāśa, ritual special -
ists added inscriptions on their reverse and to the 
12. For detailed descriptions, see Mitra (1981: 439–453) 
and Hock (1987: 70–89). We can assume that a fragmentary 
bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara with Tārā and Hayagrīva must 
have originally been another four-armed Amoghapāśa 
from Ratnagiri (making the total seven). See Mitra 1981: 
45–51 for a description of this image and its find-spot.
13. I was able to find only one twelve-armed metal 
Avalokiteśvara, accompanied by Tārā and Bhṛkuṭī, prob -
ably dating to the circa late 9th–10th century from Bihar, 
now in the collection of the Newark Museum (Acc. No. 
86.308). 
14. We can notice the significance of this bodhisattva 
for the Buddhist community at Ratnagiri when we see 
that his sculptures were made in larger numbers and pro -
portions than any other cultic deity commissioned at this 
site. In terms of other over-life size cultic sculptures at 
Ratnagiri, we find two Mañjuśrī sculptures (ca. 9th century), 
one Mahākaruṇā (ca. late 9th century) and two Tārā in 
Aṣṭamahābhaya form (belonging to the 9th and 11th centu -
ries). For distribution of iconographic types which reveals 
the importance of Amoghapāśa at Ratnagiri, see Behrendt 
2020 and Dhingra 2021.
15. At Ratnagiri, a new standing Amoghapāśa image, 
larger and slightly different from the late 8th-century one 
was commissioned between ca. 8th and early 10th centu -
ries. All images measure between 1.905 and 2.438 metres 
in height. 
Fig. 2.2: Amoghapāśa Lokeśvara, ca. 1268–1280. Candi 
Jago, Tumpung, East Java. Photo: Sonali Dhingra, 2016.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   10 23/7/22   2:43 PM

--- [Page 19] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites11
Fig. 2.3: Chronology of Amoghapāśa images in Odisha, c. late 8th to early 10th centuries. *indicates approximate 
measurements; border indicates inscribed images. Khondalite. Photo: Sonali Dhingra, 2017.
Fig.2.4: Amoghapāśa, c. late 8th-century Ratnagiri, Odisha, India. Ratnagiri Site Museum, Khondalite. Photo: 
Sonali Dhingra, 2017.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   11 23/7/22   2:43 PM

--- [Page 20] ---
Sonali Dhingra12
back slabs. These texts serve as another impor -
tant indicator of the cultic status of Amoghapāśa 
images from Ratnagiri. Chronological analysis of 
sculptures from Odisha based on style suggests that 
the practice of inscribing Amoghapāśa sculptures 
with the Pratītyasamutpāda gāthā, the dharma 
relic, and dhāraṇī inscriptions became common 
sometime around the mid-9th century.16 In the 
group of standing Amoghapāśa sculptures from 
Ratnagiri, three late-9th to 10th century examples, 
among the tallest in the corpus, are inscribed (Fig. 
2.3: see images marked with a yellow border). One 
of these, datable roughly to the tail-end of the 9th 
century or early 10th century, is etched with the 
Buddhist formula and a long dhāraṇī inscription 
on its reverse; two others in the sequence only 
contain the ye dharma verse on the halo around 
the head of the bodhisattva (Mitra 1981: 448–449; 
Patnaik and Kar 2005: 271). Unfortunately, the 
longer dhāraṇī text was damaged when found 
(Mitra 1981: 441–442). 
Though several well-executed examples of 
Amoghapāśa sculptures exist from Odisha, it is 
curious that no example of the Amoghapāśahṛ -
dayadhāraṇī (other than possibly the above noted 
Amoghapāśa from Ratnagiri with a long inscription 
on its reverse) is known from Odisha. The Sanskrit 
text of the spell entitled Amoghapāśahṛdaya was 
widely circulated. It was translated into Chinese by 
587 CE, and again by Xuanzang (659 CE), the (late) 
Bodhiruci (?–727 CE), Amoghavajra (704–774 CE), 
and *Dānapāla/Shihu (982–1012 CE).17 Arlo Grif-
fiths (2014) has identified an abbreviated version 
of the Amoghapāśahṛdayadhāraṇī from Indonesia 
and dated it to the circa 9th century. This extract 
was written on a gold foil and was rediscovered 
16. O n the Buddhist creed, see Boucher 1991; for a study 
of the material and religious meanings of inscriptions on
artistic remains, see Kim 2014b. For a survey of dhāraṇī
inscriptions from Odisha, see Mishra 2016. For a detailed 
study of the term dhāraṇī , see Davidson 2009. For th e
Indonesian context see Griffiths 2014, who observes that
dhāraṇī  inscriptions from a variety of contexts in Indonesia
seem to cluster around the 9th–10th centuries.
17. Ro nald M. Davidson (2014) has examined th e
Amoghapāśahṛdayadhāraṇī and other related texts wit h
an eye towards how these materials were formulated and
presented.in a temple context on Bali.18 The text includes 
only the quintessential mantra—one that appears 
at the end of the Dunhuang and Japanese manu-
scripts discussed above—, which functioned as a 
substitute, according to Griffiths, for the whole. 
Furthermore, discussing this Amoghapāśahṛ -
dayadhāraṇī, Griffiths (ibid.: 185) also observes how 
the Amoghapāśahṛdaya text puts much emphasis 
on its circulation but not necessarily on its being 
written down. As Gregory Schopen (2005 [1976]: 
36) noted, a spot on the earth associated with this
text was believed to become blessed, honoured,
and shielded by the gods. While there is no known 
surviving Amoghapāśahṛdayadhāraṇī text from
Odisha, given the popularity of Amoghapāśa’s
images at specific moments, one wonders if the
image can be considered a visual trace of this
powerful dhāraṇī, which sanctified the site wher-
ever it appeared. We may also suggest that the
frequently reevaluated iconographic features of
Amoghapāśa, as I will discuss below, reflect a con-
scious artistic strategy for imparting a special status 
to Amoghapāśa sculptures at Ratnagiri.
 The earliest Amoghapāśa stele at Ratnagiri, 
dated to circa the 8th century, shows a standing, 
four-armed slightly corpulent Avalokiteśvara, 
flanked by Tārā and Bhṛkuṭī seated frontally on 
lotus pedestals (Fig. 2.4). We can notice that he 
holds his main attribute, the lasso, in his upper 
left hand, somewhat wedged next to the full-blown 
lotus (padma) held by the hand next to it (Fig. 2.5). 
The top right hand holds a rosary (akṣamālā), and 
the primary right hand is in a benevolent gesture 
of varada or boon-giving. The placement of the 
lasso ( pāśa) next to the full-blown lotus appears to 
have derived from Amoghapāśa images discovered 
at Kurkihar in Bihar (Donaldson 2001: 205, 264). 
This similarity in the iconographic arrangement of 
attributes may indicate the existence of contacts 
between those two roughly contemporaneous mo -
nastic centres. However, it is significant to note 
that the next generation of artists at Ratnagiri, as 
we will see below, chose to alter the iconographic 
placement of the attributes of the bodhisattva.
18. Th is gold foil was found at Pura Pegulingan on Bali,
when the temple was being disassembled for reconstruction 
(Griffiths 2014: 183).
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   12 23/7/22   2:43 PM

--- [Page 21] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites13
Known for the unique portrayal of an oversized 
and theatrical Hayagrīva figure, a circa mid-9th 
century Amoghapāśa image from Ratnagiri is 
considered to be the most finely carved among 
all the images of this bodhisattva in Odisha (Fig. 
2.1). He is bordered on either side by luscious 
stalks of beautifully delineated, full-blown lotuses. 
Relaxed in tribhaṅga posture, his lower right hand 
rests elegantly on a lotus-cushion as he dispenses 
boons. His corresponding left hand is placed lov-
ingly on the head of his four-armed accomplice, 
Hayagrīva—who, holding a noose, closely mirrors 
the role of his sire. The bodhisattva wields his 
important attributes in his upper two arms. Closer 
looking reveals that he is shown simultaneously 
holding two objects in the upper right hand, a 
feature unique to Amoghapāśa in Odisha. A rosary dangles between the index finger and the thumb, 
while his primary feature, the clearly articulated 
noose, casually held between the index and middle 
fingers, gently hovers above. Also, the bodhisattva 
is shown tightly clutching his other main feature, 
the water-flask of the wandering ascetic (kamaṇḍa -
lu) in his upper left hand—another quintessen -
tial stylistic feature of bodhisattva crafted in the 
Odisha tradition. 
In all following examples from Odisha, the 
bodhisattva holds his principal attribute, the noose, 
in his upper right hand rather than the upper left  
hand. This artistic innovation brings symmetry 
and balance to the composition. The placement 
of the lasso in the deity’s right hand (rather than 
the left) brings the central defining feature of 
Amoghapāśa, the lasso, into sharper visual focus. 
It is also worth pointing out that the lasso or noose, 
depicted with realistic detail, conveys the texture 
and materiality of a rope (Fig. 2.6). In examples 
from Odisha, carved against a plain back slab, the 
physicality of the rope stands out. The lasso is not 
hanging limply but is mid-air as if approaching 
the onlooker. All these features make a pointed 
gesture towards amplifying the dynamism of the 
bodhisattva and communicating his extraordinary 
powers as a cultic saviour. Furthermore, in all fol -
lowing examples of Amoghapāśa from Ratnagiri, 
his significant role as the bearer and giver of the 
sacred water to pretas (hungry ghosts) is bolstered 
by the artistic choice of prominently depicting 
the water-flask as a counterpart to the lasso in 
his upper left hand. Despite these slight stylistic 
changes, the overall consistency of the icono -
graphical conventions of Amoghapāśa images 
recovered at Odisha’s main Buddhist sites shows 
that through the 9th century the artistic practice 
became deliberated and organized, thus giving a 
cohesive quality to the sculptures made in this 
regional tradition.
I now turn to a discussion of the import of 
the lasso, a unique attribute that will remain a 
distinct marker of this bodhisattva. The exact sig-
nificance of the lasso wielded by Amoghapāśa is 
unclear. Perhaps, for this reason, scholars have 
interpreted the lasso variously as a weapon used 
for ‘binding the enemies of Buddhism’, thereby 
Fig. 2.5: Top left hand of Amoghapāśa wielding the 
lasso, c. 8th century, Ratnagiri, Odisha. (Detail of 
Figure 2.4.) Photo: Sonali Dhingra, 2017. 
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   13 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 22] ---
Sonali Dhingra14
suggesting an aggressive role for Amoghapāśa, 
or ‘to lead all beings to enlightenment’, which 
implies a solely soteriological significance (Guy 
2014: 251; Pal 1966: 238; Wong 2007: 151). However, 
the above interpretations do not take into account 
the mundane needs of the Buddhist community 
and the ‘instrumental role’ of Buddhism that schol -
ars have emphasized (Kim and Lewis 2019; Lewis 
1989, 2000; Mishra 2009), nor do they consider 
the material aspects of surviving stone sculptures. 
Amoghapāśa’s images from Odisha were made in 
colossal scale, had a strong physical presence at 
Ratnagiri, and visually highlighted the lasso. As 
surviving art historical evidence dating to the late 
first millennium suggests, these images were part 
of a mature Mahāyāna milieu. Prompted by the 
physical and visual features of Amoghapāśa stone 
stele at Ratnagiri, I would offer a new interpretation 
of the deeper symbolic meaning of his main attrib -
ute. I suggest that the lasso may be understood to 
signify the cultic aspect of Amoghapāśa that can 
effortlessly haul devotees out of a painful bodily 
condition at the time of death.19 
The Amoghapāśahṛdayadhāraṇī sheds ad -
ditional light on Amoghapāśa’s powers. It illu-
minates Amoghapāśa’s role as a reliever of pain, 
giver of a beautiful body, and arbitrator that could 
19. Since in addition to ‘lasso’ another meaning of the 
Sanskrit term pāśa , especially in the Śaiva Siddhānta tra -
dition, is ‘bond’ (Acharya 2014), I wonder whether this 
attribute may represent a Buddhist appropriation of the 
Śaiva concepts of ‘cattle’ or ‘bound soul’ ( paśu ), i.e. convey 
the image of the bodhisattva drawing the devotee out of the 
cycle of rebirths in addition to difficult worldly conditions. prolong life and provide a fortunate rebirth. While 
Amoghapāśa is associated mainly with salvation, a 
significant concern in this text is the bodhisattva’s 
ability to assuage the fears and bodily discomforts 
of a diseased devotee. The author(s) give a long 
list of physical ailments affecting almost all parts 
of the body: ‘fevers’ of several kinds and dura -
tions, soreness and pains (‘sore eyes’ or ‘lips’ or 
‘tongue’, pain in different parts of the body such 
as the ears and teeth), and skin ailments (‘black 
leprosy’, ‘white leprosy’, ‘boils’). All these illnesses 
may be cured by chanting Amoghapāśa’s prayer 
‘only once’. Besides, mental states of unease, such 
as a ‘bad dream’, could also be addressed by the 
bodhisattva’s prayer (Meisezahl 1962: 291). Ap -
pended to these are other generalized problems: 
‘killing, imprisoning, flogging or defaming’, loss 
of wealth, fire, prisons, witches, evil spirits, and 
thieves, many of which are reminiscent of the rep-
ertoire of Aṣṭamahābhaya Avalokiteśvara or the 
‘Eight Great Fears Saviour’. Additionally, the text 
claims over twenty other boons, namely freeing 
the devotee from bodily disease, the bestowal of 
a smooth, handsome, and slender body, and the 
prolongation of life. 
Then, the text points explicitly to the fears of 
ailing or dying devotees, and their faith in the ef-
ficacy of bodhisattva Amoghapāśa. After listing 
the twenty generic boons, it proceeds to describe 
the eight Dharmas that provide an insight into the 
ruminations of an entire community of devotees, 
and their perception of Amoghapāśa’s powerful 
mediations into their mundane human lives. By 
clearly describing the physical states of the human 
Fig. 2.6: Details of pāśa  from Amoghapāśa steles, Ratnagiri, and Udayagiri 1. Images are dated between c. late 
8th and early 10th centuries. Photo: Sonali Dhingra, 2017.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   14 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 23] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites15
body at the deathbed, the text highlights the faith 
in Amoghapāśa for assistance during that crucial 
moment. Fasting and repeating Amoghapāśa’s 
Hṛdaya only seven times was regarded as a power-
ful means to soothe the anguish associated with the 
fear of bodily pain and death. The Amoghapāśahṛ-
dayadhāraṇī makes a final promise. It states that 
‘At the hour of death, the bodhisattva, Mahāsattva, 
Saint Avalokiteśvara will appear to him in the shape 
of a monk.’ The votary, born in a Buddhakṣetra 
in the future, will have a desirable afterlife. Thus, 
while announcing the bodhisattva’s specific role, 
this woefully matter-of-fact text ends on a happy 
note (Meisezahl 1962: 293–294). 
Here, we may draw an interesting parallel 
between the above-described manifestation of 
Amoghapāśa at the ‘hour of death’ and the cult 
of Jizō (Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva). Raigō, translated 
as the ‘the welcoming descent’, became a common 
feature in text and imagery in the Heian and Kam -
akura periods in Japan. While this concept was 
popular in Buddhist Pure Land milieus in Japan, 
scholars have found no Indian antecedents for 
it (Horton 2008: 31). An important aspect of the 
idea of raigō in its fully developed form was the 
descent of Amidā accompanied by bodhisattva 
Avalokiteśvara and other attendants to greet those 
at the deathbed and escort them to the Pure Land. 
A popular ritual in Japan included the practice 
of holding threads connected to an image of the 
Buddha on one’s deathbed (ibid.: 41). Though we 
have no surviving evidence of this practice in India, 
the popularity of Amoghapāśa images in devotion -
al contexts during the mediaeval period suggests 
that the practice of turning to this bodhisattva 
to mitigate fears at the time of death might have 
been carried out in Buddhist communities in the 
subcontinent. 
Returning to the contents of the Amoghapāśahṛ -
dayadhāraṇī, we can notice that the text signifi-
cantly expands on Avalokiteśvara’s associations 
with deliverance, old age, and salvation of sen -
tient beings. This quality of the bodhisattva was 
already introduced in the Gaṇḍavyūha sūtra, and 
significantly expanded in the Kāraṇḍavyūha sūtra  
(Studholme 2002: 50) in which he is a central figure. 
I would suggest that Amoghapāśa’s particular 
iconographic attribute—from which he derives his very name—, the pāśa, makes conceptual sense 
for having the symbolic power to reach out to lift  
and transport suffering beings from perils. This 
aspect is closely related to the early forms of Av-
alokiteśvara and is found in the Kāraṇḍavyūha of 
the 5th century, where reciting his name is said to 
free beings from ‘old age, death, disease and lamen -
tation’ (ibid .: 16). As surviving sculptures indicate, 
Avalokiteśvara’s role as Amoghapāśa seems to have 
solidified by circa 8th-century Eastern India. In 
essence, he appears to have been a general alleviator 
of all troubles and an exclusive saviour at the time 
of death. Next, we will turn to the broader reli -
gious milieu in which Amoghapāśa’s iconography 
developed in India. 
iconographic precedents and 
multi-religious indic landscape
The appearance of Amoghapāśa in the 8th century 
is an important development in Indic iconogra -
phy. This invention may be interpreted within the 
trajectory of the development of Avalokiteśvara’s 
iconography. The idea of Aṣṭamahābhaya Ava-
lokiteśvara, widely established at Western Deccan 
Buddhist sites such as Kanheri, Ajanta, Ellora, and 
Aurangabad, came to be associated with Tārā in 
Odisha.20 On the other hand, Avalokiteśvara 
appears in different manifestations, such as 
Amoghapāśa, with specific cultic associations that 
were current in that geographical space. My study 
identifies a historical pattern in the transforma -
tion of this bodhisattva’s iconography from the 
well-established cultic form of Aṣṭamahābhaya 
Avalokiteśvara at the monasteries and temples of 
Western Deccan into Amoghapāśa, which became 
popular in large portions of Eastern India. Prayers 
associated with Amoghapāśa, as shown above, 
subsume the earlier eight great perils associated 
with Avalokiteśvara.
Among the panoply of available iconographic 
attributes to be given to a compassionate bodhisat -
20. My larger study on Buddhist sculpture from Odisha 
highlights this pattern (Dhingra 2021). For examples of 
Aṣṭamahābhaya Avalokiteśvara, see Bautze-Picron 2004: 
256–257. For Aṣṭamahābhaya Tārā, see Ghosh 1980.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   15 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 24] ---
Sonali Dhingra16
tva figure, the noose appears to be a curious yet 
telling choice. It is significant for being the first 
dynamically active attribute that was given to 
Avalokiteśvara. His two essential characteristics, 
the lotus and water-flask, remained his constant 
iconographic markers. An aggressive weapon like 
the lasso, on the other hand, appears to be more 
in line with the strand of esoteric imagery that 
was developing by the 8th–9th century. Perhaps 
because of this attribute, Amoghapāśa is all too 
casually given an ‘esoteric’ appellation, without 
any close consideration of the actual practice as-
sociated with him in India.21 His images emerged 
at a particular moment in Buddhist history—at 
the juncture between mature Mahāyāna and Va-
jrayāna Buddhism. In the South Asian context, 
Amoghapāśa was more in line with Mahāyāna 
Buddhist practices, which share some common 
elements, such as the incorporation of dhāraṇīs, 
with what scholars often characterize as tantric 
Buddhist practice. 
Amoghapāśa sculptures produced in Eastern 
India were also a product of an environment rife 
with iconographic inventions in all Indic religious 
traditions.22 The attribute was closely associated 
with the Hindu god Yama or Kāla, who used the 
lasso, sometimes forcefully, to bind and take away 
mortals at the time of death (Wessels-Mevissen 
21. Nancy Hock (1987: 89) discusses the significance of 
the compassionate bodhisattva theme at Ratnagiri, a site 
she characterizes as ‘Mantrayānic’. On the basis of extant 
imagery at Ratnagiri, Linrothe (1999: 55–56), following 
Schopen’s textual studies (2005, Chapter 12 [1985]), charac -
terizes much of what is happening at this site in the 7th and 
8th century as ‘a minority development within the range of 
orthodox Mahāyāna ritual’ and not ‘tantric’. Images were 
not open to a select few; rather, they were available to a large 
audience. Robert Linrothe’s three-partite model based on 
the ‘wrathful deity’ motif emphasizes the overlay between 
different phases in Esoteric Buddhist imagery between the 
6th and the 12th centuries, and cautions against ascribing 
‘esoteric’ too casually to Buddhist material from South Asia. 
The same point is stressed by Bautze-Picron (2005: 418) in 
the context of bodhisattva images belonging to the period 
between the 8th and 10th centuries.
22. In a detailed study on Buddhism in Odisha, Umakanta 
Mishra (2009) makes the significant point of placing 
developments in Buddhism within the larger multi-
religious landscape.2001: 73–77, Gopinatha Rao 1971 [1914]: 159). In 
Odisha, Yama appears as a dikpāla (guardian of 
the eight directions) of the south, for instance, at 
the early 7th- or 8th-century Paraśurāmeśvara 
temple in Bhubaneshwar and the 11th-century 
Rājarānī temple in its vicinity. While Amoghapāśa 
and Yama share the same iconographic attribute, 
they appear to have differing connotations: one 
benevolent and the other not. Further, while stele 
representing Amoghapāśa in Odisha were made 
as objects central to cultic devotion, Yama images 
appear as part of a codified set of protectors at 
Hindu temples.23 
In the same vein, Amoghapāśa’s origin may 
be better understood in relation to contemporary 
Indic ritual. In addition to the transformation of 
ideas across geographic spaces, another significant 
influence on the conception of Avalokiteśvara as 
Amoghapāśa may be the contemporary popular -
ity of the ‘Hindu’ funerary cult. Janice Leoshko 
(1985: 33) has suggested that Amoghapāśa images 
appeared first in and around Gayā, a pilgrimage 
site for Hindus, specifically associated with funer-
ary practices at least since the 8th century. Gail 
(2001: 161–166) has suggested that Gayā was the 
‘source of inspiration’ for Amoghapāśa images in 
Odisha. Scholars working on funerary connections 
of later Javanese Amoghapāśa statuary from Candi 
Jago accept Leoshko’s argument that Amoghapāśa 
was invented as a Buddhist version of the ‘Hindu’ 
ancestral rites and ceremonies of śrāddha due to 
Avalokiteśvara’s general association with the allevi -
ation of suffering of all beings, and of his particular 
aspect as the saviour at the ‘hour of death’ (Reichle 
2007: 104–105; Guy 2018: 219). 
Recent scholarship has successfully demon -
strated a close connection between Buddhist and 
non-Buddhist cultic and funerary practices. For 
instance, when discussing practices of ‘Śaiva-Śākta’ 
and ‘Tantric Buddhists’, Alexis Sanderson (2009: 
124–129) argues that rituals developed in ‘Man -
trayāna’—a contested term in the development 
of Buddhism—closely mirror Śaiva examples, 
having been modelled on them. Sanderson further 
argues for the adoption of the funeral rites of the 
23. For a detailed study on Hindu temples in Odisha, see 
Donaldson 1985.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   16 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 25] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites17
Śaivas ( antye ṣṭi) by Buddhists and provides textual 
support for shared ritual practices in the two reli-
gious communities. In the archaeological context, 
too, scholars suggest that communities with dif -
ferent sectarian affiliations shared ritualistic prac-
tices. Gregory Schopen argues that while Hindus 
practised throwing ashes of the dead in the River 
Ganges, Buddhists devised an alternative method: 
they deposited corporeal relics of the departed 
in mini-stūpas at Buddhist sites. Schopen (1997 
[1987]) has argued that for Buddhists, death in the 
aniconic presence of the Buddha, the stūpa, guar-
anteed a favourable rebirth.24 Let us now turn to 
Ratnagiri as a case study to consider these themes 
in greater detail. 
amoghapāśa and funerary rites 
at ratnagiri (9th–10th centuries)
The physical location of the large-scale cultic 
sculptures of bodhisattva Amoghapāśa in Odisha 
can be better contextualized by considering rock-
cut examples from cave temples in the Western 
Deccan as a precedent. Amoghapāśa images from 
Eastern India, as already noted above, should be 
placed in the lineage of popular cultic images of 
Avalokiteśvara, such as the Aṣṭamahābhaya icons 
from the Western Deccan. Between the 5th and 
7th centuries, Aṣṭamahābhaya Avalokiteśvara 
gained increasing significance for local trading 
communities at Ajanta, Ellora, Aurangabad, and 
Kanheri (Brancaccio 2011: 160–164). Being placed 
in easily accessible spots, they were prominent in 
the overall iconographic programme. 
At Aurangabad, an Aṣṭamahābhaya Avaloki-  
teśvara image is placed notably on a wall directly to the left of the leading portal to the main shrine 
of Cave 7 (circa 7th century) (Fig. 2.7). Similarly, 
now loose sculptures at Ratnagiri were positioned 
at accessible shrine-temples rather than in dark 
inner chambers of the monastery and were open 
for the viewing of a wide range of people (Fig. 2.8). 
Amoghapāśa images were not only made in sizea-
ble proportions but were also of superior quality, 
24. On this theme, see Schopen 1997 [1987], Chapter 7; 
and 2005 [1994], Chapter 14. suggesting lavish patronage and accessibility to a 
large audience. 
By the 9th–10th centuries, the Buddhist site 
of Ratnagiri was a dense amalgam of various 
archaeological and artistic remains. It was divided 
into two distinct areas—the monastic spaces 
(Monastery 1 and 2), and the stūpa area at the top of 
the hill (Fig. 2.9). The unstructured and unplanned 
intervening space between the main stūpa and the 
monasteries (where temples are marked in Fig. 2.9) 
appears to have been the focus of intense image 
worship and other rituals.25 Debala Mitra noted 
structural foundations and architectural remnants 
in brick and stone of at least eight temples.26 Some 
with in situ  images were uncovered in the mounds 
excavated in front of Monastery 2, whereas the area 
in front of Monastery 1 still remains unexposed. 
Early accounts of the site indicate that many more 
such temples must have existed.27 Mitra (1981: 
103–104, 287, 311–312, 323–324, 341–342) dates the 
temples between the 9th and mid-10th century 
or so. Given the information at our disposal it is 
difficult to relate them sequentially, but it is clear 
that many of these temples were built adjacent to 
each other. In spite of their unplanned appearance, 
the huddled together nature of these temple-
shrines indicates that the builders were concerned 
that they had limited available space at the hilltop 
at Ratnagiri. 
After Debala Mitra’s archaeological work 
(1958–1961), another series of small-scale exca -
vations was carried out at Ratnagiri in 1998, 1999, 
and 2004 (Patnaik and Kar 2005). Conservation 
of the decaying Mahākāla temple and an inves -
tigation of its foundations incidentally revealed 
that it was built over extensive Buddhist vestiges 
25. See Reichle 2016 for a study of the rituals at Ratnagiri, 
particularly in the precincts of Monastery 1. 
26. For detailed discussions of the layout of the stūpa , 
monastery, and temples at Ratnagiri, see Dhingra 2021. 
Temples became a feature of South Asian archaeological 
sites between the 7th and 12th centuries, see Chakrabarti 
1995: 200. 
27. Accounts of the site suggest that architectural members 
and mounds were disturbed and reused by villagers. The 
sculptures found were presumably relocated under the 
Banyan grove, where Mitra reportedly found them in the 
late 1950s, see Mukerjee 1957: 15–19.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   17 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 26] ---
Sonali Dhingra18
Fig. 2.7: Aṣṭamahābhaya Avalokiteśvara, Aurangabad, c. 7th century. Photo: Jinah Kim.
Fig. 2.8: Relocated sculptures of Amoghapāśa, Monastery 1. Khondalite. Ratnagiri, Odisha, India. Photo: Sonali 
Dhingra, 2017.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   18 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 27] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites19
Fig. 2.9: Site Plan, Ratnagiri Hill adapted and updated from Mitra 1981: 6. Drawn by Mariana Souto.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   19 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 28] ---
Sonali Dhingra20
dating between the 9th and 12th centuries.28 Ar-
chaeologists differ in their opinion on the date of 
this temple, but it is clear that it was erected over 
earlier layers.29 Excavation beneath and around 
the Mahākāla temple brought to light other im -
portant structural and artistic vestiges from the 
Buddhist period of the site. The Mahākāla temple 
was directly built over a very large brick stūpa. 
Three other brick-built shrines, facing East, were 
found. Most importantly, the excavators found 
a sizable, north-facing square brick-built shrine 
(internally measuring 2.40 m) west of the brick 
stūpa, which housed a colossal Amoghapāśa (2.52 
× 1.23 ×  0.52 m) (Fig. 2.10). Only stone foundations 
in the form of intersecting blocks that might have 
served to install the Amoghapāśa image are now 
traceable. A one-line inscription around its head 
suggests that this cult image was consecrated 
upon installation (Patnaik and Kar 2005: 271).30  
Based on this inscription and stylistically, this 
image may be dated to the later part of the 9th 
century. 
On the basis of the above evidence, we can con -
clude that the dislocated Amoghapāśa sculptures 
from Ratnagiri were installed in temple-shrines 
located around the monasteries and main stūpa.31 
It is also important to highlight that Amoghapāśa 
images have been discovered at sites where an 
abundance of small mortuary remains in the form 
of miniature stone stūpas have been excavated.32 
28. Originally located in the shrine-and- stūpa  area in 
front of Monastery 2, this temple was dismantled and 
moved to the Western slope of the hill (Patnaik and Kar 
2005: 270).
29. Patnaik and Kar (2005) propose a 15th or 16th century 
date, while Mitra (1958) dates the temple to the 12th century 
or earlier based on the style of the main enshrined deity. 
30. Unfortunately, this inscription was unreadable due to 
the accretions on the stone surface of the sculpture. Patnaik 
and Kar (2005: 271) note that it is the ye dharma verse.
31. Many of these sculptures have been moved to the 
porch and courtyard of Monastery 1. Another sculpture 
was moved to the Ratnagiri Site Museum (based on my 
fieldnotes from 2017). Similarly, a tall Amoghapāśa image 
discovered at Udayagiri, though devoid of architectural 
context, still stands to the north of a monastery at  
Udayagiri 1 (Bandyopadhyay 2004: 73–74). 
32. Amoghapāśa images appear almost simultaneously 
with funerary deposits at Ratnagiri, Bodhgayā, and 
Fig. 2.10: Amoghapāśa, mid-to-late 9th century, 
Ratnagiri, Odisha, India. Photo: Sonali Dhingra, 2017.
At Ratnagiri and Bodhgayā, archaeologists have 
documented the significant presence of votive 
stūpas near the main stūpa and all over the site.33 
It is important to note that in addition to the area 
southwest to the main stūpa, miniature stūpas 
were also deposited next to the temples in front 
of Monastery 2.34 About six hundred remained at 
the site by Debala Mitra’s excavations in 1958–1961, 
while several were removed and re-used in village 
homes. Bénisti (1981) noted the thematic content 
Nālandā, beginning in the 8th century. Kurkihar (Bautze-
Picron 2014; Pal 1988) is not yet excavated but also has a 
large number of votive stūpa s all around, the majority of 
which have been moved from their original settings. 
33. See Mitra 1981: 27. Mitra notes that at Ratnagiri the 
majority of small stūpa s were dedicated between the 9th 
and 13th century.
34. See Mitra 1981: CCLVIII, CCLXI, CCLXIV–VI.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   20 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 29] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites21
of these stūpas  at Ratnagiri and Bodhgayā and 
outlined their stylistic characteristics. Mitra (1981: 
108–138) notes the preponderance of a variety of 
deities in the niches of the stūpas  at Ratnagiri. The 
most popular for depiction is two-armed seated 
Tārā, followed by Avalokiteśvara, the Buddha, and 
also deities of the Vajrayāna pantheon. 
Scholars have debated the functions of kula  
stūpas .35 The motivation behind the making of 
small stūpas was first understood to be for ‘ac -
cumulation of merit’; other scholars understood 
them as ‘souvenirs’. As previously noted, Schopen 
has convincingly shown that Buddhists disposed 
of their dead at stūpa sites. These places were 
akin to Hindu tīrthas (pilgrimage sites) for being 
conglomerates of pilgrims addressing the same 
concerns of respectfully and appropriately dis -
posing of cremated ashes of their family members. 
Following Gregory Schopen’s seminal work, at least 
some ‘votive’ stūpas are understood to be vestiges 
of actual mortuary remains (Lawson 1988). At Rat -
nagiri, the small stūpas were monolithic and port-
able, with sockets as a provision to house objects 
such as metal images and charred human remains.36 
Some stūpas may have been merely votive, with 
images carved in their niches and did not contain 
human remains. Unfinished examples suggest that 
miniature stūpas were likely manufactured at an 
on-site workshop (Mitra 1981: 27–32, 109; Plates 
LIX and LX).
It certainly appears that mortuary rituals and 
memorialization constituted an essential aspect 
of what people were doing across Buddhist sacred 
sites of the 8th through the 12th centuries. For in-
stance, Hiram Woodward (1990) had identified 
the 10th–11th century as the moment when the 
scene of the ‘gift of honey’ by a monkey became 
a common theme in artistic programmes of min -
iature  stūpa s at Bodhgayā. As he demonstrates, 
this is the penultimate event before parinirvāṇa  
and has a significant conceptual connection to the 
event of the death of the Buddha. In some post-
35. The Chinese monk Yijing, in his Record of  The  
Buddhist Religion as Practiced in India and the Malay  
Archipelago , first called them kula  (‘family, clan’), and the 
name seems to have come to denote ‘a stūpa  for the dead’ 
(see Schopen 1997 [1987]: 120).
36. See Mitra, cited in Schopen (1997 [1987]: 120, n. 29).9th century structural examples from Ratnagiri 
we find carefully chosen excerpts from dhāraṇī 
texts specifically relating to death and rebirth de-
posited in them (Schopen 1997 [1987]: 121–122). 
With this link between the iconographic theme 
and life-event in mind, and on the basis of my field 
research, I further support the funerary association 
of Amoghapāśa by considering the archaeological 
contexts in which his images have been discovered. 
At Odisha’s Buddhist sites, Amoghapāśa’s images 
survive near material vestiges relating to the per-
formance of death rituals, and the majority of the 
surviving evidence clusters around the 9th and 
10th centuries (Schopen 2005 [1994]: 356). 
The archaeological context of the recent -
ly exhumed Amoghapāśa image (Fig. 2.11) also 
reveals its cultic uses. Archaeologists remarked that 
a set of fifty-two ‘votive stūpas’—both monolithic 
and structural—were arranged in four rows in a 
north-south configuration. It appears as though 
the towering Amoghapāśa sculpture, still on-site today, looks over the clusters of small kula stūpas 
that commemorate the many dead. Finally, archae -
ologists found several ritual objects, coterminous 
in date with the Avalokiteśvara image and the 
stūpas. These include earthen lamps, vases, and 
handīs  (pots), which were used in the worship 
of this image between the 9th and 12th centuries 
(Patnaik and Kar 2005: 273–274). 
It may be hypothesized that funerary rituals 
involving Amoghapāśa came up in the vicinity of 
Gayā, the pilgrimage spot for Hindus, and spread 
along particular Buddhist networks in parts of 
Eastern India. We can also look to the south of 
Odisha for precedents in mortuary rituals at Bud-
dhist sites. Situated along the southeastern part of 
India’s eastern coast, in today’s Andhra Pradesh, 
Buddhist settlements, such as Thotlakonda and 
Bavikonda, date from the early historic period to 
the 3rd century CE; other sites, such as Salihundam, 
had a more extended history, up until the early 
mediaeval period. Buddhist sites in the Andhra 
hills, as Lars Fogelin (2006: 7) argues, consisted 
of ‘mortuary landscapes’ in the form of cairns 
and boulders as well as small stone-carved stūpas. 
These sites are similar in material and form to 
finds from Odishan sites dating to a slightly later 
period, such as Langudi and Ratnagiri. This sug-
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   21 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 30] ---
Sonali Dhingra22
gests the long-established role of Buddhist monks 
in providing funerary services to the communities 
that used the site. The popularity of the cult of 
Amoghapāśa, datable to the late 8th century on 
the basis of the extant stone sculpture, may be 
an additional element, centred on image-worship, 
of this phenomenon, which was widespread in 
Buddhist practice by the 7th century (DeCaroli 
2015: 143–145).
The frequent production and popularity of 
large-scale cultic statues of Amoghapāśa in the late 
first millennium may indicate that the Buddhist 
clergy conducted mortuary rites for the laity. The 
saṅgha’s association with the satiating of hungry 
ghosts (preta) and performance of ancestral rites, 
as Robert DeCaroli notes, goes back to the early 
centuries of the Common Era. Additionally, based 
on a study of early Pali texts, DeCaroli (2004: 97) 
argues that Buddhist monks were considered to be 
‘funerary experts… adept at helping the departed’. His suggestion about the pragmatism of the saṅgha  
and its connection with the practical problems of 
Buddhist lay followers appears to be plausible. On 
the basis of the archaeological record at Ratnagiri, 
we can imagine a great deal of flexibility and prag-
matism in the performance of funeral rites. These 
rituals perhaps could even be performed sometime 
after the actual death of the person. As noted above, 
unfinished examples suggest that monolithic stone 
stūpas  were carved on-site at Ratnagiri, making the 
performance of the ritual quite convenient for a 
visiting pilgrim. 
One last piece of information from Ratnagiri 
suggests the performance of rituals by visitors, 
due to a protracted death valence for this locality, 
perhaps owing to the association of this site with 
Amoghapāśa’s cult. A stele inscribed in Gauḍiya, 
dated to around the 12th century or later, was 
found fixed firmly into the ground in a prominent 
position on site, beside the external peripheral 
Fig. 2.11: Excavated Amoghapāśa amidst kula  stūpa s, area in front of Monastery 2 (facing North). Khondalite. 
Ratnagiri, Odisha, India. Photo: Sonali Dhingra, 2017.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   22 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 31] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites23
wall of the eastern side of Monastery 1 (Mitra 1981: 
212–215).37 The inscription, in four verses, talks of 
the gift of paddy on behalf of a deceased person, 
identified as Maṅgalarāja, ‘who was greatly afraid 
of the future life’. By making this grant, it was 
wished that the ‘gate of hell may be kept well un-
opened’ for him. The donor, a ‘scion of his family’, 
appears to have made this gift for Maṅgalarāja’s 
salvation (mukti). A curse towards anyone who 
disrupted the grant ends the inscription. Though 
damaged, the inscription suggests that gifts of 
paddy per hala (a measure of land) were customar -
ily made, presumably to the saṅgha to avert a grim 
afterlife in hell. Perhaps, the specification that this 
timely gift can ‘stop his entry into hell’ suggests 
that the donors came to Ratnagiri to carry out a 
funerary or memorial ritual for a kin member. This 
inscription is a valuable clue to the function of the 
establishment, its inhabitants, and the devotional 
images discovered here. 
The above fits in well with what we learn from 
Gregory Schopen’s discussions of the Buddhist 
doctrine of ‘transference of merit’, where devotees 
could perform rituals on behalf of their parents 
and loved ones, both dead and alive.38 The agglom -
eration of Buddhists to perform certain specific 
rituals around particular images at pilgrimage 
sites, such as Ratnagiri, must have been part of 
the business of running a Buddhist establishment. 
We may conclude that Amoghapāśa’s images as 
objects central to these rituals must have, in turn, 
attracted substantial patronage in the form of 
tangible goods and monetary donations for mo-
nastic institutions, and would also have ensured 
the prosperity and prestige of a Buddhist estab -
lishment, which was one of the major concerns 
of the monastic community.
conclusion
This chapter has identified particular aspects of 
the cultic usage of colossal Amoghapāśa images 
and has animated the contexts of their viewer -
ship during the late first millennium in Odisha. 
37. The inscriptions were deciphered by D.C. Sircar. 
38. See Schopen 1997 [1985], Chapter 2. Textual accounts, both generally concerned with 
the elevation of bodhisattva cults and more con-
cerned explicitly with prayers to Amoghapāśa, 
helped to illuminate the broad-based appeal of 
this bodhisattva for the Buddhist community and 
his particularized role for a few generations of 
Indian Buddhists. By coordinating and mapping 
Amoghapāśa images with votive stūpas chron -
ologically and archeologically, I have suggested 
that the worship of Amoghapāśa as the saviour 
at the time of death may have been performed in 
tandem with the deposition of bodily remains of 
the dead in small stūpas. Through this bodhisattva, 
which had a wide appeal across Buddhist Asia in 
the mediaeval period, we can see the interactions 
between communities from regions as far apart 
as Odisha, Java, and Japan, as they shared special 
reverence for Amoghapāśa and practised death-re-
lated rituals for ancestors. 
References
Acharya, Diwakar. 2014. ‘On the Śaiva Concept of 
Innate Impurity (mala) and the Function of the 
Rite of Initiation’, Journal of Indian Philosophy  
42/1: 9–25.
Asher, Frederick. 1988. ‘Gaya Monuments of the 
Pilgrimage Town’, in Janice Leoshko (ed.), 
Bodhgaya: The Site of Enlightenment , pp. 74–88 . 
Mumbai: Marg Publications.
Bandyopadhyay, Bimal. 2004. Buddhist Centres 
of Orissa: Lalitagiri, Ratnagiri, and Udayagiri. 
New Delhi: Sundeep Prakashan.
Bautze-Picron, Claudine. 1989. ‘“Identification” 
or “classification” in Buddhist iconography: 
The case of the six-handed Avalokiteśvara 
in Bihar and Bengal, 8th to 12th century’, in 
Anna L. Dallapiccola et al. (eds.), Shastric 
Traditions in Indian Arts, pp. 35–50. Beiträge 
zur Südasienforschung 125 (University of 
Heidelberg). Stuttgart: Steiner. 
. 2004. ‘The Universal Compassionate  
Bodhisattva: Miscellaneous Aspects of Avaloki -
tasvara/Avalokiteśvara in India’, Silk Road Art 
and Archaeology 10: 225–290.
. 2005. ‘Images of Avalokiteśvara from 
Dharaut, Bihar’, in Ute Franke-Vogt and 
Hans-Joachim Weisshaar (eds.), South Asian 
Archaeology: Proceedings of the Seventeenth 
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   23 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 32] ---
Sonali Dhingra24
International Conference of the European  
Association of South Asian Archaeologists (7–11 
July 2003, Bonn), pp. 413–420. Aachen: Linden 
Soft. (Deutsches Archäologisches Institut, 
Kommission für Archäologie Außereuropäis-
cher Kulturen und Eurasien-Abteilung, 
Forschungen zur Archäologie Außereuropäis-
cher Kulturen, Band 1). 
. 2014. The Forgotten Place: Stone Images 
from Kurkihar, Bihar. 1st ed. New Delhi:  
Archaeological Survey of India.
. 2016. ‘Images of Devotion and Power in 
South & Southeast Bengal’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 163–191. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Behrendt, Kurt. 2020. ‘Buddhist Sculpture of  
Bihar and Orissa from the 9th to 12th centuries: 
The Geographic Distribution of Iconographic 
Types’, in Robert DeCaroli and Paul Lavy 
(eds.), Across the South of Asia: A Volume in 
Honor of Professor Robert L. Brown, pp. 73–90. 
New Delhi: D.K. Printworld. 
Bénisti, Mireille. 1981. Contribution à l’étude du 
stūpa bouddhique indien: Les stūpa mineurs 
de Bodh-Gayā et de Ratnagiri (Publications 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient, v. 125). 
Paris: Ecole française d’Extrême-Orient/Adrien 
Maisonneuve.
Boucher, Daniel. 1991. ‘The Pratītyasamutpādagāthā 
and Its Role in the Medieval Cult of the Relics’, 
Journal of the International Association of  
Buddhist Studies 14/1: 1–27.
Brancaccio, Pia. 2011. The Buddhist Caves at  
Aurangabad: Transformations in Art and 
Religion. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Chakrabarti, Dilip K. 1995. ‘Buddhist Sites across 
South Asia as Influenced by Political and 
Economic Forces’, World Archaeology 77/2: 
185–202.
Davidson, Ronald. 2009. ‘Studies in Dhāraṇī 
Literature I: Revisiting the Meaning of the 
Term Dhāraṇī’, Journal of Indian Philosophy  
37/2: 97–147.
. 2014. ‘Studies in Dhāraṇī Literature II: 
Pragmatics of Dhāraṇī’, Bulletin of the School 
of Oriental and African Studies, University of 
London 77/1: 5–61.DeCaroli, Robert. 2004. Haunting the Buddha: 
Indian Popular Religions and the Formation  
of Buddhism. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
. 2015. Image Problems: The Origin and 
Development of the Buddha’s Image in Early 
South Asia. Seattle: University of Washington 
Press.
Dhingra, Sonali. 2021. Cult and Colossus: Buddhist 
Sculpture from Odisha in History and Memory 
(ca. eighth-twelfth centuries). PhD dissertation, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. 
Donaldson, Thomas E. 1985. Hindu Temple Art  
of Orissa. 3 vols. Leiden: Brill. 
. 2001. Iconography of the Buddhist Sculp-
ture of Orissa. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi  
National Centre for the Arts/Abhinav Publi -
cations.
Fergusson, James and James Burgess. 1880. The 
Cave Temples of India. London: W.H. Allen 
& Co. 
Fogelin, Lars. 2006. Archaeology of Early Buddhism. 
Lanham, MD: Altamira Press.
Gail, Adalbert J. 2001. ‘Amoghapāśa in Orissa’, in 
Asko Parpola, Klaus Karttunen, and Petteri  
Koskikallio (eds.), Vidyārṇavavandanam: 
Essays in Honour of Asko Parpola ( Studia 
Orientalia 94), pp. 161–166. Helsinki: Finnish 
Oriental Society.
Ghosh, D.P. 1933. ‘Relation between the Buddha 
Images of Orissa and Java’, Modern Review  
54/5: 500–504. 
Ghosh, Mallar. 1980. Development of Bud -
dhist Iconography in Eastern India: A Study 
of Tārā, Prajñās of Five Tathāgatas and  
Bhṛikuṭī. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal 
Publishers Ltd. 
Gopinatha Rao, T.A. 1971. Elements of Hindu 
Iconography. Varanasi: Indological Book  
House.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. ‘Written Traces of the  
Buddhist Past: Mantras and Dhāraṇīs in 
Indonesian Inscriptions’, Bulletin of the  
School of Oriental and African Studies 77/1: 
137–194.
Guy, John. 2014. Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Buddhist 
Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia. New York: 
Metropolitan Museum of Art.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   24 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 33] ---
Amoghapāśa’s Cultic Role in Late First Millennium Odishan Buddhist Sites25
. 2018. ‘In Search of Blessings: Ex-Votos in 
Medieval Greater South Asia’, in Ittai Weinryb 
(ed.), Agents of Faith: Votive Objects in Time 
and Place,  pp. 191–224. New York: Bard  
Graduate Center Gallery. 
Hock, Nancy. 1987. Buddhist Ideology and the 
Sculpture of Ratnagiri, Seventh through  
Thirteenth Centuries. Berkeley: University of 
California, Berkeley.
Horton, Sarah Johanna. 2008. ‘Mukaekō: Practice 
for the Deathbed’, in Jacqueline Stone and 
Mariko Namba Walter (eds.), Death and 
Afterlife in Japanese Buddhism,  pp. 27–60. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Kim, Jinah. 2014a. ‘Local Visions, Transcendental 
Practices: Iconographic Innovations of Indian 
Esoteric Buddhism’, History of Religions 54/1: 
34–68.
. 2014b. ‘Seeing in between the Space: The 
Aura of Writing and the Shape of the Artistic 
Productions in Medieval South Asia’, in  
Benjamin Fleming and Richard Mann (eds.), 
History and Material Culture in Asian Religions , 
pp. 39–58. New York: Routledge.
. 2019. ‘Lost Books in People’s Hands: 
Human Figures and their Books in Medieval 
Odisha’, paper delivered at the 107th CAA 
Annual Conference, 13–16 February 2019. 
Kim, Jinah and Todd Lewis (ed.). 2019. Dharma 
and Puṇya: Buddhist Ritual Art of Nepal.  
Leiden: Hotei Publishing.
Kinney, Ann R., Marijke J. Klokke, and Lydia 
Kieven. 2003. Worshiping Siva and Buddha: The 
Temple Art of East Java. Honolulu: University 
of Hawai’i Press.
Lawson, Simon. 1988. ‘Votive Objects from Bodh-
gaya’, in Janice Leoshko (ed.), Bodhgaya: The 
Site of Enlightenment, pp. 64–67. Mumbai: 
Marg Publications.
Leoshko, Janice. 1985. ‘The Appearance of 
Amoghapāśa in Pāla period Art’, in A.K. Narrain 
(ed.), Studies in Buddhist Art of South Asia,  
pp. 127–135. New Delhi: Kanak Publications.
. 1988. Bodhgaya: The Site of Enlightenment. 
Mumbai: Marg Publications.
Lewis, Todd T. 1989. ‘Mahāyāna Vratas in Newar 
Buddhism’, Journal of the International Asso-
ciation of Buddhist Studies 12/1: 109–138.. 2000. Popular Buddhist Texts from Nepal: 
Narratives and Rituals of Newar Buddhism. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
. 2016. ‘A History of Buddhist Ritual’, in 
John Powers (ed.), The Buddhist World,  
pp. 318–337. Abingdon/New York: Routledge. 
Linrothe, Robert. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: 
Wrathful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan Esoteric 
Buddhist Art. Boston: Shambhala.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline and Marijke J. 
Klokke. 1988. Divine Bronze: Ancient Indone-
sian Bronzes from A.D. 600 to 1600. Leiden: 
E.J. Brill.
Meisezahl, Richard O. 1962. ‘The Amoghapāśahṛ-
daya-Dhāraṇī: The Early Sanskrit Manuscript 
of the Reiunji Critically Edited and Translated’, 
Monumenta Nipponica 17 (1/4): 265–328.
. 1967. ‘Amoghapāśa: Some Nepalese  
Representations and Their Vajrayānic Aspects’, 
Monumenta Serica 26: 455–497.
Mishra, Umakanta. 2009. Vajrayāna Buddhism: 
Study in Social Iconography. New Delhi:  
Pratibha Prakashan.
. 2016. ‘Dhāraṇīs from the Buddhist Sites 
of Orissa’, Journal of the Dept. of Archaeology, 
Jahangirnagar University 22: 73–84.
Mitra, Debala. 1958. ‘A Temple of the Buddhist 
God Mahakala’, The Indian Historical Quarterly  
34/1: 1–5.
. 1981. Ratnagiri, 1958–61. Volume 80. New 
Delhi: Archaeological Survey of India. 
Mukerjee, Prabhat. 1957. Lalitagiri, Udayagiri, and 
Ratnagiri. Bhubaneshwar: The Mahabodhi 
Society.
Pal, Pratapaditya. 1966. ‘The Iconography of 
Amoghapāśa Lokesvara–I’, Oriental Art 12/4: 
234.
. 1967. ‘The Iconography of Amoghapāśa 
Lokesvara–II’, Oriental Art 13/1: 20.
. 1988. ‘A Forgotten Monastery of Ancient 
Bihar’, South Asian Studies 4/1: 83–88.
Patnaik, Jeeban and Sushank Kar. 2005. ‘Scientific 
Clearance and Salvage of Dharma Mahakala 
Temple, Ratnagiri’, in Gopinatha Mohanty et 
al. (eds.), Cultural Heritage of Orissa, Volume 5,  
pp. 270–274. Bhubaneshwar: State Level  
Vyasakabi Fakir Mohan Smruti Samsad. 
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   25 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 34] ---
Sonali Dhingra26
Proser, Adriana (ed.). 2010. Pilgrimage and  
Buddhist Art. New York: Asia Society/New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Reichle, Natasha. 2007. Violence and Serenity: Late 
Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
. 2016. ‘Imagery, Ritual and Ideology at the 
Mahavihara at Ratnagiri’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 211–236. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute. 
Sanderson, Alexis. 2009. ‘The Śaiva Age’, in 
Singo Einoo (ed.), Genesis and Development 
of Tantrism, pp. 41–350. Tokyo: Institute of 
Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo. 
Schopen, Gregory. 1997. Bones, Stones, and 
Buddhist Monks: Collected Papers on the 
Archaeology, Epigraphy, and Texts of Monastic 
Buddhism in India. Studies in the Buddhist 
Traditions. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press.
. 2005. Figments and Fragments of Mahā-  
yāna Buddhism in India: More Collected  
Papers. Studies in the Buddhist Traditions. 
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Sinclair, Iain. 2022. ‘From Melayu to Thamel 
and Back: The Transmigration of the Eight-
Armed Amoghapāśa’, in Andrea Acri and Peter  
Sharrock (eds.), The Creative South: Buddhist 
and Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, 
Volume One, pp. 9–65. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.Studholme, Alexander. 2002. The Origins of Om 
Manipadme Hum: A Study of Kāraṇḍavyūha 
Sūtra. Albany: State University of New York 
Press.
Tingley [Hock], Nancy. 2006. ‘Avalokiteśvara in 
Javanese Context: Gaṇḍavyūha, Kūṭāgāra, and 
Amoghapāśa’, The Journal of the Walters Art 
Museum 64/65: 65–80.
Wessels-Mevissen, Corinna. 2001. The Gods of 
the Directions in Ancient India: Origin and 
Early Development in Art and Literature (until 
c. 1000 A.D.). Monographien Zur Indischen 
Archäologie, Kunst Und Philologie, Bd. 14. 
Berlin: Reimer.
Willetts, William. 1963. ‘Ratnagiri, an Eighth 
Century Buddhist Monastic Foundation’,  
Oriental Art 9: 15–21.
Williams, Joanna. 2007. ‘The Bird of Hariti: Some 
Questions about the Buddhist Iconography of 
Orissa and Java’, in K.S. Behera (ed.), Kalinga-
Indonesian Cultural Relations, pp. 247–250. 
Bhubaneshwar: Orissan Institute of Maritime 
and South East Asian Studies, Department of 
Culture, Government of Orissa.
Wong, Dorothy. 2007. ‘The Case of Amoghapāśa’, 
Journal of Inner Asian Art and Archaeology 2: 
151–158.
Woodward, Hiram W. Jr. 1990. ‘The Life of the 
Buddha in the Pāla Monastic Environment’, 
Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 48: 13–27.
02_CreSouthV2_5P_23Jul22.indd   26 23/7/22   2:44 PM

--- [Page 35] ---
Chapter 3
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍala s in Maritime Asia:  
Epigraphic and Iconographic Evidence from Odisha and Java 
(8th–11th century)
Umakanta Mishra
introduction
The eastward spread of Esoteric Buddhist 
Tantra, of which architectural and sculp -
tural maṇḍalas1 were a constitutive part, 
from the Indian subcontinent to other regions of 
Maritime Asia was a defining feature of the Indic 
Middle Ages. Starting from the 7th century CE, 
Esoteric Buddhism began to develop iconographic 
programmes based on maṇḍalic themes in which 
the Pañcatathāgata system, with Vairocana or 
Akṣobhya at the centre, as well as bodhisattvas 
and other divinities, were arranged in particular 
alignments. This chapter explores the development 
of maṇḍalas based on Caryā-  and Yoga-tantras in 
the architectural and iconographic programmes of 
Buddhist sites in Ratnagiri, Udayagiri, and Lalita-  
giri, situated in what is now the eastern littoral 
state of Odisha in India. In the first part, it argues 
that Odisha emerged as an early centre of Esoteric 
Buddhism, presenting epigraphic, sculptural, and 
architectural evidence of maṇḍalas that Buddhist 
monks transmitted to Southeast and East Asia. In 
the second part, it highlights similarities between 
the Odishan architectural and art historical remains 
and analogous monuments and objects from the 
Buddhist sites of Central Java, which were also 
based on the Caryā-  and Yoga-tantras. 
1. Maṇḍala s involve meditative visualization of hosts of 
supernormal beings in particular geometrical arrange -
ments for the purpose of mundane and soteriological goals 
(Skt. siddhi ).part i:  
odisha as an early centre of  
esoteric buddhism
The Identification of Odisha as Uḍḍiyāna/
Oḍḍiyāna
Before starting my exploration of Esoteric Bud -
dhism in Maritime Asia with special reference to 
Odisha, a discussion of the issue of the identifica-
tion of Uḍḍiyāna/Oḍḍiyāna is in order. Uḍḍiyāna/
Oḍḍiyāna, which the Tibetan accounts regard as 
an important centre of Esoteric Buddhism, has 
variously been associated with the Swat Valley in 
Northwestern India or Southeastern India (Odisha, 
Tamil Nadu). The Gaṇeśa image inscription found 
in Gadrez (near Swat) and its reading by scholars, 
such as Ronald Davidson (2002: 209), led many 
to assert in unequivocal terms that Oḍḍiyāna is 
the Swat valley, and Sanderson (2007: 265–67) 
has gathered further evidence from Sanskrit texts 
supporting this identification.2 However, as argued 
by Sahu (1958: 147), the words Oḍa, Oḍra, Uḍra, 
Oḍiviśa and Oḍiyāna are all used as variants of 
Uḍḍiyāna in both Tibetan and Sanskrit texts: for 
instance, in the Sādhanamālā (12th century CE), 
Uḍḍiyāna is also spelled as Oḍrayāna (Odisha), 
while in the Kālikā Purāṇa (c. 11th–12th century) 
it is spelled either Uḍḍiyāna or Oḍra (van Kooij 
2. Sanderson (2007: 266) states that ‘the evidence offered 
for these counter-theories [locating Uḍḍiyāna in regions 
different than the Northeastern part of the Indian subconti -
nent] is negligible and they have been able to multiply only 
because of the apparent lack of references to the location 
of Uḍḍiy āna in known Sanskrit sources.’
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   27 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 36] ---
Umakanta Mishra28
1972: 170–171). In the light of analogous textual 
evidence, the tantric seat of Oḍḍiyāna has been 
identified with Odisha by Donaldson (2001: 8–16), 
and as Kāñcī in Tamil Nadu by Lokesh Chandra 
(1995: 174). 
Oḍḍiyāna is also associated with Śambhāla. Ac-
cording to the 18th-century Tibetan text Pag Sam 
Jon Zang, Uḍḍiyāna is divided into two kingdoms: 
Śambhāla, where Indrabhūti ruled, and Laṅkāpurī, 
where Jalendra ruled. Jalendra’s son married 
Lakṣmīṅkarā, Indrabhūti’s sister. This account 
seems to associate Oḍḍiyāna with Odisha, as 
Laṅkāpurī may be identified as an ancient toponym 
of that region. The Mahada Copper Plates issued by 
the Somavaṃśī Prince Someśvaradeva (10th century 
CE) reveal that the prince was ruling over Paścima 
Laṅkā (Western Laṅkā) on the bank of the Cit -
rotpalā river (Mahānadī), which is identified with 
Sonepur (Epigraphia Indica XII 1913–14: 237–242). 
The goddess Lankeśvarī, referred to in some of the 
Sādhanas of the Sādhanamālā, is still regarded as 
the presiding deity of the territory of Sonepur on 
the bank of the Mahānadī, and is worshipped today 
in the bed of the river on a low rock, called Lankeś-
varī. Sahu (1958) prefers to identify Śambhāla with 
Samabalpur and Laṅkā with Sonepur.
That Odisha/Oḍrayāna/Oḍīvīsa was a major 
centre of Guhyasamāja teachings, and Esoteric 
Buddhism in general, may be inferred from two ref -
erences in Tibetan sources. According to Tāranātha 
(Chattopadhyaya 2010 [1980]: 289), Pito, sent to 
Śambhāla by Vajrapāṇi, brought many Tantras with 
him, which he taught to the students at Ratnagiri 
vihāra (Sahu 1958: 148). In the Blue Annals it is 
stated in connection with the search for the Kāla-
cakratantra by ācārya Celuka (Tsi-lu-pa) that the 
ācārya had read it in the vihāra of Ratnagiri (Rin 
chen ri bo), which had been left undamaged by the 
Turuṣkas (Roerich 1959 II: 755). Celuka’s connection 
with Odisha and Ratnagiri vihāra is stated in other 
Tibetan texts as well (Mitra 1981 I: 18).
It now seems appropriate to discuss some 
further instances of the historical memory of 
Odisha in Tibetan sources, and in particular the 
identity of King Viśukalpa of the southern country, 
who is introduced in the 15th-century Tibetan 
chronicle Blue Annals as being in the line of suc-
cessors of the Guhyasamājatantra from Indrabhūti of Oḍḍiyāna, an early adept of the Guhyasamāja.3 
The text states the following with regard to the 
introduction of the Guhyasamāja to Tibet:
The adepts of the (Guhya) samāja agree that 
the Guhyasamājatantra had been preached by 
the Munīndra himself, following a request of 
Indrabhūti, the great king of Oḍḍīyāna, at the 
time when Buddha had manifested in Oḍḍīyā -
na and initiated (the king). Thereupon the king 
and his retinue practised the Tantra by means 
of prapañca-caryā (spros-spyod)  and became 
initiates (Vidyādhara—one who has attained 
spiritual realisation or siddhi, grub-pa), and 
the country of Oḍḍīyāna became deserted. 
After that a yoginī, who had descended from 
the realm of the Nāgas, heard it (i.e. the Tan -
tra) from (king) Indrabhūti and taught it to 
king Viśukalpa of the Southern country. The 
Mahā-brāhmaṇa Saraha heard it from him... 
(Blue Annals, ed. Roerich 1959 I: 359).
As The Blue Annals refer to the transmission of 
the Guhyasamāja from Indrabhūti through the 
Nāgas to Viśukalpa, one is tempted to assume that 
Oḍḍiyāna and the southern country were nearby, 
and not situated at the opposite corners of the 
Indian subcontinent, as other Tibetan sources 
would seem to believe.
King Viśukalpa also figures in an early 17th 
century account by Tāranātha in connection with 
the Guhyasamāja and its transmission. Tāranātha 
states, ‘In the account of the ārya -s of the Guhyasa -
māja, *Visukalpa, the king of *Oḍiviśa, is to be 
taken as a contemporary of king *Candana-pāla’ 
(Chattopadhyaya 2010 [1980]: 104). Tāranātha 
describes Viśukalpa as a member of the Guhyasa-
māja tradition, which corroborates The Blue 
Annals’ account; however, he calls him a king of 
Oḍiviśa rather than of the southern country, as 
The Blue Annals do. The Blue Annals refer to the 
transmission of the Guhyasamāja from Indrabhū-
ti to Saraha, a paradigmatic siddha,  also known 
as Rāhulabhadra. The author of the 18th century 
Tibetan text Pag Sam Jon Zang (Dass 1908: xxvi) 
3. His son, the Guru Padmasambhava, introduced Bud -
dhism to Tibet. A later Indrabhūti, credited with the au -
thorship of the Jñānasiddhi and the Sahajasiddhi , is known 
from the Bstan ’gyur collection (Davidson 2002: 45–83).
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   28 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 37] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia29
describes Saraha as an adept of both Buddhism 
and brahmanical religions, who flourished during 
the reign of Candanapāla. Since Candanapāla was 
referred to by Tāranātha as a contemporary of King 
Viśukalpa of Oḍiviśa, Saraha may have been a con -
temporary of Viśukalpa.
Saraha’s time is traced to the 7th century CE 
(633 CE) by Benoytosh Bhattacharyya (1980: 
66), while Indrabhūti is ascribed to the early 8th 
century, even though the Blue Annals place In -
drabhūti first in the order of siddhas. This confu-
sion in the order of siddhas and their chronology 
are largely due to different Tibetan masters sub-
scribing to their own traditions.4 The difficulty in 
developing an exact chronology of the siddhas 
caused Guenther to state that ‘although the histo -
ricity of Saraha cannot be doubted, the elusiveness 
of the man is matched by that of his teaching’ 
(Guenther 1969: 12–13). Given that there were pos -
sibly various ‘doubles’ for such famous (Esoteric) 
Buddhist masters as Indrabhūti and Nāgārjuna, 
Saraha can be tentatively date to around the 8th 
or 9th century. According to the author of the 
Pag Sam Jon Zang , Saraha visited Odisha, where 
he learnt Mantrayāna from one Covesa Kalpa 
(Bhattacharyya 1928 II: XLIV). The fact that the 
Middle Indo-Aryan language of the dohākośa of 
many Siddhācāryas, including that of Saraha, has 
striking lexical and other grammatical similarities 
with Oḍia language (Kar 1989) suggests another 
association between Saraha and Odisha.
A local oral tradition associated with the 
Buddhist sites of Ratnagiri, Lalitagiri, and Udaya-  
giri attributes to King Vaśukalpa of the Keśarī 
dynasty the construction of those establishments. 
The Keśarī dynasty of the Odishan tradition has 
been identified with the Somavaṃśis, who came 
to coastal Odisha from Upper Mahānadī valley of 
Dakṣiṇa Kośala and united the two subregions of 
Odisha in the 9th–10th century. 
It would thus seem that Vaśukalpa known from 
local legends can now tentatively be identified 
4. For instance, Tāranātha, the Pag Sam Jon Zang and 
the Blue Annals start with Padmavajra, Anaṅgavajra, In -
drabhūti etc., in that order, while Kazi Dawa-Samdup (1987), 
in his introduction to the Cakrasaṃvara Tantra , gives a 
different lineage, starting with Saraha, Nāgārjuna, Śabaripa, 
etc.with the Viśukalpa of the Guhyasamāja tradition 
mentioned in the Blue Annals and Tāranātha’s 
chronicle as belonging to Odisha. In the light of the 
above, it does not seem far-fetched to hypothesize 
that the Nāgas referred to by the Blue Annals as the 
intermediaries in the transmission of the Guhyasa -
māja from Indrabhūti to Viśukalpa and Saraha 
may be the ‘historical’ Nāgakula kings who ruled 
over some parts of central and northern Odisha 
from the 6th century CE, as is known from the 
Asanpat inscriptions of Śatrubhañja (Tripathy 1997 
I: 171–172). King Śatrubhañja mentioned in the 
Asanpat inscription (paleographically dated to the 
6th century) traces his lineage to Nāgakula and 
describes his donation to a Buddhist establishment. 
Further, a 10th–11th century step-well inscription 
in the Buddhist site of Udayagiri describes Rāṇaka 
Vajranāga as the endower of the well, thereby at-
testing to the Nāga rule in Odisha (Mishra 2018: 
69–94; Donaldson 2001: 24). 
Maṇḍalas in Esoteric Buddhism: Early Evidence 
from Odisha
Buddhist esotericism involved the employment of 
many ritual technologies like mantras, maṇḍalas, 
and abhiṣeka (‘consecration’). The development of 
maṇḍala-based religious and iconographic pro -
grammes constitutes an important element in the 
Buddhist landscapes of Maritime Asia. Starting 
from the late 7th century CE, Buddhism in various 
regions of Maritime Asia began to develop esoteric 
iconographic programmes in stūpas  based on the 
maṇḍalic arrangement in which the Pañcatathāga -
tas, bodhisattvas, and other divinities were shown 
in particular alignments. Scholars like Bernet 
Kempers (1933) and, more recently, Sharrock 
(2016), Sundberg (2003, 2011), Acri (2016), and 
others highlight the role of South India, Nālandā, 
and Sri Lanka’s Abhayagiri Vihāra as important 
centres in the spread of maṇḍalas across Maritime 
Asia on the basis of epigraphic and archaeologi-
cal evidence as well as Chinese Buddhist records. 
The following section explores the architectural 
and iconographic programmes of maṇḍalas in 
the Buddhist ‘diamond triangle’ sites of Ratnagiri, 
Udayagiri, and Lalitagiri of Odisha.
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   29 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 38] ---
Umakanta Mishra30
Garbhadhātu- and Vajradhātu- Maṇḍala s of the 
Mahāvairocanābhisambodhisūtra  (MVS ) and 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha  (STTS )
Two early important texts that formed the basis 
of the Buddhist maṇḍalas  and Esoteric Buddhism 
in India (7th–8th century CE), China, and Japan 
were the MVS and STTS. In the MVS, Vairocana is 
represented as Abhisambodhi (totally enlightened) 
whereas in the STTS, Vairocana is considered as 
sarvavid (omniscient). The MVS, a mūla-tantra 
composed in the 7th century CE and consolidat-
ed over time into a Yogatantra text, is a seminal 
work in the history of Esoteric Buddhism, offer -
ing one of the first fully developed expositions 
of this current. In India and Tibet, this scripture 
came to be classified as a Caryātantra, or ‘Practice 
Tantra’—corresponding to the second category 
of what was later to become in Tibet the standard 
fourfold classification of Buddhist Tantras—, only 
to be eventually superseded to a large degree by 
the STTS in the 8th century CE. The STTS does not 
explain concepts; rather, it is concerned with pro-
viding the rules for the maṇḍalic rites: how to draw 
maṇḍalas, how to carry out rituals of initiation into 
these maṇḍalas (abhiṣeka), etc. It also describes the 
powers resulting from the performance of these 
ritual actions. 
The twin texts of the MVS and the STTS deal 
with the visualization of deities in a maṇḍala. 
The Garbhadhātu maṇḍala (The Womb Realm) 
is based on the MVS. There are two versions of Gar -
bhadhātu maṇḍala: one by Amoghavajra (which 
is the most popular), and one by Śubhākarasiṃha. 
The name of the maṇḍala derives from chapter 2 
of the sūtra, where it is said that Mahāvairocana 
revealed the maṇḍalas’ secret teachings to his 
disciple Vajrasattva from his ‘womb of compas-
sion’. In the Garbha maṇḍala, the alignment of 
the Buddhas, bodhisattvas, and other divinities 
is arranged around the Buddha Vairocana in the 
central position (pericarp) in the eight-petalled 
lotus surrounded by other deities, placed in the 
points of the compass, namely Ratnaketu in the 
east, Saṃkusumitarāja in the south, Amitābha in 
the west, and Duṇḍibhinirghoṣa in the north. The 
four bodhisattvas in the intermediate petals are Sa -
mantabhadra (SE), Mañjuśrī (SW), Maitreya (NW), and Lokeśvara (NE). The bodhisattvas represented 
in the outer circles are Mañjuśrī (E), Viṣkambhin 
(S), Ᾱkāśagarbha (W), and Kṣitigarbha (N). While 
Vairocana is mostly represented in the wheel-turn -
ing-mudrā, in Shingon Buddhism he is shown in 
meditation-mudrā. In the Vajradhātu maṇḍala, 
Vairocana occupies the centre of the eight-petalled 
lotus while Akṣobhya is assigned the seat in the 
east, Amitābha in the west, Amoghasiddhi in the 
north, and Ratnasambhava in the south (Snodgrass 
1988 I, fig. 306) .
Buddhist Masters and the Circulation of 
Maṇḍala s in Maritime Asia
The Chinese Tang period text Song gaoseng zhuan , 
compiled by Zanning (919–1001 CE), gives the 
biography of many Indian Buddhist monks who 
took Buddhism to China (Chou 1945). Three 
prominent monks in the transmission of the 
MVS and the STTS to China were Vajrabodhi 
(671–741 CE), his disciple Amoghavajra (704–774 
CE), and Śubhākarasiṃha. Vajrabodhi’s Chinese 
disciple, Lu Xiang, left a biography of his master 
and Amoghavajra, who was one of the celebrated 
Buddhist monks in the Tang Court.
While Amoghavajra and Vajrabodhi have re -
ceived scholarly attentions in recent times, there 
is a lack of detailed studies on Śubhākarasiṃha 
(Sundberg 2011: 129; Goble 2019). Śubhākarasiṃha 
(Shanwuwei , 637–735 CE) was an influential and 
well-travelled monk: he went to China, made a 
commentary on the MVS, a text dealing with the 
Garbhadhātu maṇḍala, and a manuscript of the 
same bearing his signature was brought to Japan 
by Doji (Hakeda 1972: 19). According to the Taishō 
Tripiṭaka, Śubhākarasiṃha was a native of Central 
India (most likely Chhatishgarh and Panduvaṃśī) 
whose royal ancestors, on account of internal prob -
lems, moved to Oḍra and ruled over it. However, 
he became a novice at the age of 13 and travelled 
towards a monastery near the sea (most likely 
Ratnagiri), where he obtained the Saddharma -
puṇḍarīkasūtra. He then visited many countries, 
travelling by ship. He came to Veṇuvana vihāra  
of Nālandā, becoming a disciple of Dharmagupta. 
Dharmagupta imparted to him dhāraṇīs, yoga,  
and the three secrets of words, speech and mind. 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   30 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 39] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia31
Then he wandered in many parts of India and, on 
the instruction of his preceptor Dharmagupta, left 
for China via Kashmir, Swat, and Tibet, finally 
arriving in China in 712/716 CE at the invitation 
of the Chinese emperor. Among the texts that he 
brought to China were the MVS, which he himself 
(or Yixing, under his direction) translated into 
Chinese in 725 CE. It is significant to mention that 
Odisha was regarded by Hodge (2005: 19–20) as 
having played a possible role in the composition 
of this text, and that the images of Vairocanābhi-  
sambodhi are concentrated in Odisha (Tanaka 
2018: 108). The MVS survives in early Japanese 
copies, known as the Gobushinkan (Yamamoto 
1990). Śubhākarasiṃha also made an iconographic 
copybook in his own hand of the maṇḍala deities 
of the STTS. Both the STTS and Gobushinkan 
emphasize the importance of Mahāvairocana and 
the interrelated Mahākaruṇāgarbhodbhava- and 
Vajradhātu-maṇḍalas. These two maṇḍalas form 
the basis of Japanese Shingon Buddhism and, ac-
cording to Japanese legends, were transmitted by 
Mahāvairocana to Vajrasattva, who kept them for 
several hundred years within an iron stūpa  in South 
India until they were recovered by Nāgārjuna 
(Snodgrass 1988 I: 111–119). Śubhākarasiṃha is also 
credited to have translated into Chinese the manual 
Uṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇī, the Sanskrit version of which 
made way to Japan. The recital of this dhāraṇī  
twenty-one times was advised for most purposes 
in Śubhākarasiṃha’s manual (T 19.373b–375b) and 
was adopted by the Tang Emperor Daizong from 
Amoghavajra (Chou 1945: 322).5 
Influence of the MVS  & STTS on the 
Iconographic Programmes of the Buddhist Sites 
of Odisha
There is iconographic and epigraphic evidence of 
the influence of the MVS and the STTS in the reli-
gious programmes of the Buddhist sites of Odisha. 
5. Several other texts were translated by Śubhākarasiṃha, 
including the Ᾱryasubāhuparipṛcchānāmatantra  (T 18 
895), the Susiddhikaramahātantrasādhanopāyikapaṭala 
(T 18 896), the Essentials of Meditation (T 917 18.942b–46a),  
the Method for Reciting the Dhāra ṇī of Bodhisattva 
Ākāśagarbha, Whose Unsurpassed Mind Can Fulfill All 
Requests  (T 1145; Pinte 2011: 339–361), etc.The growing importance of ācāryas in the new 
ritual context of Vajrayāna in Odisha is evident 
from both epigraphic and sculptural vestiges. 
The Khaḍipadā Avalokiteśvara image inscription 
(9th century) refers to the donor, Rāhularuci, as 
mahāmaṇḍalācārya and paramaguru (Ghosh 
1941–1942: 247–248). The former title seems to be 
a dignity conferred on Rāhularuci. The twin title 
suggests that Rāhularuci was quite adept in the 
maṇḍala rituals of Esoteric Buddhism, and that 
he was a paramaguru who initiated students into 
the world of maṇḍala rituals. Similarly, a sculp -
tural representation of the five Tathāgatas with an 
inscription on its pedestal in Siddhamātṛkā script 
of 8th century CE, now in the Jagannath temple 
Complex in Jajpur town, was installed by a Buddhist 
ācārya (Mishra and Acharya 2016). This inscription 
too attests to the appearance of Esoteric Buddhist 
preceptors in Odisha by the 8th century.
Buddhist remains attesting iconographical and 
architectural evidence of maṇḍalas  in Odisha are 
strewn throughout the state, but the main con -
centration is in the Assia group of hills in the 
undivided Cuttack district. Archaeological exca-
vations and surveys have revealed more than 100 
sites, and the sites of Ratnagiri, Lalitagiri, and 
Udayagiri contain the most substantial presence 
of Esoteric Buddhist features (Mitra 1981–1983; 
Patnaik 2017; Trivedi 2011). As has been noted in 
the previous section, two important texts carried 
by Śubhākarasiṃha, Vajrabodhi and Amogha -
vajra to China are the MVS and the STTS. The 
Abhisambodhi Vairocana image of Lalitagiri  
(Fig. 3.1) is inscribed with a mantra on the back 
slab that reads namaḥ samantabuddhānām aḥ vīra   
(line 1) hūṃ khaṃ (line 2) (Sawa 1982: 9). This 
mantra appears in chapter six of the MVS (Giebel 
2005). On palaeographical grounds, the inscrip -
tion can be dated to the early 8th century CE, that 
is, around the same time of the transmission of 
the MVS and STTS to China by Śubhākarasiṃha, 
Vajrabodhi, and Amoghavajra. We do not know 
whether this image of Abhisambodhi Vairocana, 
found in the Hatikhol area of the village (Patnaik 
2017), formed part of a larger iconographic pro-
gramme based on the Garbhadhātu maṇḍala. 
The Lalitagiri site contains images of two other 
Buddhas in bhūmisparśa-mudrā, the one flanked 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   31 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 40] ---
Umakanta Mishra32
Fig. 3.1: Abhisaṁbodhi Vairocana with the mantra 
namaḥ samantabuddhānām aḥ vīra hūṃ khaṃ 
engraved on its backslab, Lalitagiri, early 8th century. 
(Photo: author)
by Avalokiteśvara and Mañjuśrī, the other by Av-
alokiteśvara and Maitreya (Fig. 3.2). These can be 
iconographically dated to the early 8th century 
CE—that is, the same period of the Abhisam -
bodhi Vairocana image—, and are compatible 
with a Garbhadhātu maṇḍala alignment. Many 
freestanding life-sized eight bodhisattva images 
dated to the early 9th century CE were also found, 
suggesting a possible maṇḍalic, early Mantranaya 
alignment of these Mahāyāna deities (Donaldson 
1995; Patnaik 2017). 
Another piece of evidence associated with the 
Garbhadhātu maṇḍala comes from the stūpa of 
Udayagiri I area, which can be dated to the 9th 
century CE (Fig. 3.3). The excavation of this area in 
1986 revealed a maṇḍala-arranged stūpa with four 
Buddhas in the four cardinal directions flanked by 
two boddhisattvas each. The Udayagiri Mahāstūpa (dated to the 10th century) CE has been identified 
as a Garbhadhātu maṇḍala-stūpa by Donaldson 
(2001: 120). In the outer niches of the Udayagiri 
stūpa four Tathāgata Buddhas have been repre -
sented. They have been identified as Vairocana 
flanked by Mañjuśrī on the right and Kṣitigarbha 
on the left in the north, Akṣobhya flanked by Mai-
treya in the dexter and Sarvanivāraṇaviṣkambhin 
on the sinister facing east, Amitābha flanked by 
Lokeśvara on the right and Vajrapāṇi on the left  
facing west, and Ratnasambhava flanked on two 
sides by Samantabhadra on the right in the south 
(Donaldson 2001: 121; Mishra 2009). This align -
ment of the bodhisattvas has close affinities with 
the Garbhadhātu maṇḍala of the MVS. Vairocana, 
as described in Śubhākarasiṃha’s version of the 
text, is without ornamentation, except for a jewel in 
the coiffure. Table 3.1 represents the iconographic 
alignments of the Tathāgatas and bodhisattvas in 
the Udayagiri stūpa near Monastery 1.
Vajradhātu maṇḍala:  Icongraphic evidence 
from Ratnagiri
In the  Garbhadhātu  maṇḍala , which is part of the 
MVS , Vairocana is represented as Abhisambodhi 
(totally enlightened) and, therefore, he appears 
without any ornament, as in the Lalitagiri image 
and the Udayagiri mahāstūpa . In contrast, the 
STTS , which is a Yogatantra, represents Vairocana 
as an omniscient and universal emperor. While 
Udayagiri contains evidence of both the Garbha-  
dhātu  maṇḍala  of the MVS  and the Vajradhātu  
maṇḍala  of the STTS , Ratnagiri only shows evi -
dence of the Vajradhātu maṇḍala.
The Museum in the Collectorate compound of 
Jajpur contains two images from Ratnagiri—one 
of Akṣobhya and the other of Amitābha, each sur-
rounded by four bodhisattvas (Fig. 3.4). Akṣobhya 
is surrounded by Vajrasattva on the lower right, 
as known from the vajra and possibly the bell; 
Vajrarāja on the upper right, who holds his aṅkuśa 
(goad); Vajrarāga on the lower left, dispensing 
arrow from the bow; and Vajrasādhu on the top 
left, who holds a vajra. In the Amitābha image, the 
bodhisattva on the lower left is holding a sword and 
can be identified as Vajratīkṣṇa on the basis of the 
STTS (Lokesh Chandra and Snellgrove 1981a: 19). 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   32 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 41] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia33
Fig. 3.2: Akṣobhya flanked by two bodhisattvas, possibly as part of a larger maṇḍala iconographic programme in 
the Caityagṛha area of Lalitagiri, early 8th century. (Photo: author) 
Fig. 3.3: Udayagiri Mahāstūpa , 9th–10th century. (Photo: author)
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   33 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 42] ---
Umakanta Mishra34
Table 3.1 :
Alignment of Buddhas and bodhisattvas in the stūpa  of Udayagiri, Odisha (9 th–10 th century),  
modelled on the Garbhadhātu maṇḍala. (Photos: author)
Buddhas Photos
Vairocana is flanked by Mañjuśrī on the right and Kṣitigarbha on the 
left. Mañjuśrī has a book on an utpala . Kṣitigarbha holds a kalaśa  
with kalpavṛkṣa rather than a lotus or jewel as prescribed in the text.
Amitābha is flanked by Avalokiteśvra on the right and Vajrapāṇi on the left. The former holds a lotus and the latter holds a vajra  on their 
respective left hand.
Ratnasambhava is flanked by Samantabhadra and Ᾱkāśagarbha. Samantabhadra holds a sword while Ᾱkāśagarbha holds a jewel on a lotus.
Akṣobhya is flanked by Maitreya on the right and Sarvanivāraṇaviṣkambhin on the left. The former holds a nāgakeśara flower rather than a kuṇḍika (pot), while the latter holds a jewel, in conformity with the text.
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   34 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 43] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia35
Fig. 3.4: (lower right) Amitābha surrounded by 
Vajratīkṣṇā, Vajrahetu, Vajradharma, Vajrabhāṣa and 
Akṣobhya surrounded by Vajrasattva, as known from 
the vajra  and possibly the bell; (upper right) Vajrarāja 
holding his aṅkuśa (goad); (lower left) Vajrarāga 
dispensing arrow from the bow; Vajrasādhu from 
Ratnagiri (now in Jajpur Collectorate Museum), 
9th–10th century. (Photo: author)
The bodhisattva on the upper left corresponds to 
Vajrahetu, whose two hands are clenched in front 
of his chest, where he holds a circular object. The 
bodhisattva on the lower right is not recognizable, 
while the one on the upper right could possibly 
be Vajradharma. Another Amitābha image sur -
rounded by four bodhisattvas (as in the above) 
was found at Ratnagiri, indicating the possibility of 
another set of Vajradhātu maṇḍala configuration 
there (Donaldson 2001: 126). Huntington (1981: Fig. 
5) identifies the presence of a similar Vajradhātu  
maṇḍala at Cave 6 at Aurangabad.
Thus, the presence of these twin images of 
Akṣobhya and Amitābha clearly indicate the in -
fluence of the STTS and its associated Vajradhātu  maṇḍala in the iconographic programmes of the 
Buddhist site of Ratnagiri around the 9th century 
CE. Another piece of evidence of the influence 
of the STTS on the iconographic programmes in 
Udayagiri is the image of Vajradhātu-Vairocana 
found to the right of the door jamb of the shrine 
chamber of monastery 1 at Udayagiri (Fig. 3.5).  
Here Vairocana facing north wears a kirīṭi crown, is 
rich in ornamentation with hair cascading down on 
his shoulders, and displays the bodhyaṅgī-mudrā. 
The bodhyangī-mudrā or mudrā of six elements 
signifies the union of the five knowledges of the 
Tathāgatas into a single enlightenment, whereby 
the index finger of the left hand is clasped by the five 
fingers of the right hand, referred to as the ‘knowl-
edge-fist mudrā’. In the Vajradhātu  maṇḍala of the 
STTS, a goddess is located in each intermediate 
directions in the strips outside the central chapel, 
namely, Vajradhūpā, Vajrapuṣpā, Vajralokā, and 
Fig. 3.5: Vairocana as sarvavid  surrounded by deified 
Vajradhūpā, Vajragandhā, Vajrapuṣpā, and Vajramālā, 
Udayagiri, 9th century. (Photo: author)
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   35 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 44] ---
Umakanta Mishra36
Vajragandhā, seated in vajraparyaṅkāsana and 
holding their corresponding attribute(s) in one or 
both hands (see Tanaka 2018: 137). Vajradhūpā (SE, 
on the right corner of the pedestal), corresponding 
to Akṣobhya, offers incense (dhūpa) and thus holds 
an incense-stick; Vajrapuṣpā (SW, on the upper 
right corner of the backslab), corresponding to 
Ratnasamhbhava, offers flowers (puṣpa) and thus 
carries a garland of flowers; Vajradīpā (NW, upper 
left corner of the backslab), corresponding to Ami-
tābha, offers a lamp (dīpa) and thus holds a torch; 
and Vajragandhā (NE, on the left corner of the 
pedestal), corresponding to Amoghasiddhi, offers 
sandal-powder or perfume (gandha) and holds a 
sandalpot of powdered-incense (Maṅḍala no. 19 
of Niṣpannayogāvalī 56). In this representation 
of Vairocana at Udayagiri Monastery 1, one can 
notice a distinct ideological shift: whereas in the 
stūpa-maṇḍala of Udayagiri and in the Lalitagiri 
image he is represented without ornaments and 
crown, thus symbolizing the enlightenment of 
Vairocana as in the MVS, the rich ornamentation, 
kirīṭi jewelled crown, and bodhyaṅgī-mudrā of this 
image represent Vairocana as a universal emperor, 
as in the STTS tradition.
Temple 4 of Ratnagiri contains an icono -
graphic programme based on the Pradīpod -
dyotananāmaṭīkā, a commentary written by  
Candrakīrti in the 9th century on the Guhyasa -
māja (Wayman 1977: 341). Temple 4 contains 
the sculptures identifiable as the three yogins 
described in the nidāna. These practitioners rep-
resent the stages in the yoga of the Guhyasamāja  
and can be related to Body, Speech, and Mind and 
the Vajra, Padma, and Tathāgata families (i.e., the 
trikula). Temple 4 is a tiny building, in which only 
one or two persons can enter simultaneously. But 
inside it one encounters three life-sized images: 
as one enters, one can see Vajradhara or Vajra -
sattva (belonging to the Vajra family) to the left, 
Vajradharma (belonging to the Padma family) to 
the right, and a figure in samādhi-mudrā facing 
the entrance, identified as Dharmaśaṅkhasamādhi 
Mañjuśrī by the excavator (Mitra 1983 II: Pls. 
CCXXXVIII, CCXXXIX, CCXLa). Vajradharma 
largely approximates to the description of the deity 
in the Sādhanamālā, except for the fact that the Ratnagiri image does not sit on a peacock. Five 
Tathāgatas adorn his crown with Amitābha in the 
centre, supporting the view that he is a yogic form 
of Buddha Amitābha. He opens a lotus bud in his 
hands. The deity is surrounded by four female 
figures, most likely four prajñās. The Ratnagiri 
bodhisattva sits in full lotus posture with his right 
hand holding a vajra against the chest, and his 
left hand holding a ghaṇṭa (bell) on his hip. The 
sculpture is incomplete, which is quite odd in 
view of the fact that it is inside a shrine chamber. 
Debala Mitra (1981–1983 II: 290–292) explains this 
as having been caused by the poor quality of the 
stone. Unfinished Vajrasattva images were also 
found in Sarnath and, perhaps, Borobudur (Wil-
liams 1986: 103). Nancy Hock, using Wayman’s 
work based on the Pradīpoddyotana, interprets 
these unfinished images as a deliberate attempt on 
the part of the Ratnagiri and Borobudur religious 
ideologues to represent the ‘arcane body, which, 
upon the completion of the Stage of Generation, 
becomes an illusory body in the stage of Comple-
tion’ (Hock 1987: 140). Wayman (1977: 156–173) 
equates Vajradharma with the Diamond of Speech 
and Vajrasattva with the Diamond of Mind. The 
same can be equated with the daśabhūmi (ten 
stages), with Vajrasattva representing the tenth 
bodhisattva stage which is equated with the illusory 
body. This would provide a doctrinal explanation 
for the unfinished Buddha image of Borodbdur 
and the bodhisattva of Temple 4 of Ratnagiri. The 
third image (Fig. 3.6) in Temple 4 can be identified 
with a yogic form of Vairocana, who is in samādhi-
mudrā, and who might represent the Diamond 
Body of the Guhyasamāja. Mahāvairocanābhisam -
bodhi is flanked by seated images of Avalokiteśvara 
and Vajrapāṇi. According to Tanaka (2018: 110), 
this iconographic arrangement in Temple 4 is 
explained in the Prajñāpāramitānayasūtra and 
also coincides with the main deity of the Lotus 
family in the Garbha maṇḍala. It must be noted 
that the group of three bodhisattvas—Avalokiteś-
vara, Mañjuśrī, and Vajrapāṇi, arranged in the 
three families system of Padma (Vajradharma with 
Amitābha family), Vajra (Vajradhara/Vajrasattva 
with Akṣobhya family), and Tathāgata (Yogins of 
Vairocana/Mañjuśrī)—remains important in the 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   36 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 45] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia37
iconography of the site even though the Guhyasa -
māja knows five families.6 
From Vairocana to Akṣobhya Maṇḍala  and 
from Yogatantra to Yogottaratantra
Starting from the 9th century, the concept of 
Vairocana as an omniscient universal emperor,  
as in the Yogatantra text STTS , gave way to  
an Akṣobhya-dominated maṇḍala  as prescribed 
in the Yogottarantra texts, such as the Guhyasa -
māja , where that deity holds a central posi-  
tion. Evidence of the presence of Akṣobhya-  
6. In the Kәlurak inscription from Central Java, 
Mañjuśrī (as Mañjughoṣa) is identified as the central 
deity. Both the icon of Temple 4 at Ratnagiri (Mañjuśrī/
Dharmaśaṅkhasamādhi, belonging to the Vairocana 
family) and the Javanese inscription may suggest a shared 
identification between Mañjuśrī and Vairocana in both 
areas (see below, p. 45).dominated maṇḍala s starts to appear from the 
late 9th century CE in Udayagiri and Ratnagiri. In 
the Niṣpannayogāvalī of Paṇḍita Abhyākaragupta 
of Vikramaśīla Mahāvihāra , dating to the 10th 
century CE, Akṣobhya is surrounded in the third 
circle by eight bodhisattvas: Maitreya and Kṣitigar -
bha in the east, Vajrapāṇi and Khagarbha in the 
south, Lokeśvara and Mañjughoṣa in the west, and 
Sarvanivāraṇaviṣkambhin and Samantabhadra in 
the north (Bhattacharyya 1972 : 36). In chapter 2 
of the visualization of deities in the Guhyasamāja , 
Akṣobhya is described as the supreme god ( bhaga -
vān) with alternate names such as Vajradhara and 
Mahāvajradhara  (Bhattacharyya 1967: Ch 2). In the 
pentadic classification of the Buddha families of 
Vajrayāna, Akṣobhya belongs to the Vajra family; 
thus, with the emergence of Akṣobhya as the 
bhagavān , Ratnagiri and Udayagiri made a tran -
sition to the Yogottaratantra  tradition. In Ratnagiri 
and Udayagiri there are many sculptural maṇḍala s 
of eight bodhisattvas flanking Akṣobhya instead of 
the Buddha or Vairocana, as in the iconographical 
pattern associated with earlier Esoteric Buddhist 
scriptures. In the Ratnagiri image Akṣobhya is 
flanked by Maitreya, Lokeśvara, Kṣitigarbha on the 
dexter and on the sinister by Khagarbha, Vajrapāṇi, 
Mañjuśrī, and Sarvanivāraṇaviṣkambhin (Fig. 3.7). 
Thus, the iconographic representations at Ratnagiri 
and Udayagiri closely correspond to the alignment 
of the maṇḍala s in the Niṣpannayogāvalī  and the 
Guhyasamāja , where the highest god is described 
as Vajradhara, also corresponding to Vajrasattva 
and Akṣobhya.
Yoganiruttaratantras/Yoginītantras (late 10th 
century CE) at Ratnagiri
While the iconographic programme in Udayagiri 
ended with Yogottaratantras, and in Lalitagiri, 
which contains the earliest Buddhist images, the 
iconographic programme did not go beyond the 
MVS  and STTS , from the late 10th century Rat -
nagiri emerged as an important centre of Yogan -
iruttaratantras/Yoginītantras, and textual sources 
mentioned it in association with Kālacakrayāna . 
This is also suggested by the manuscript evidence 
of the only surviving initiation manual of the 
Fig. 3.6: Y ogin of Vairocana/Dharmaśaṅkhasandhi 
Mañjuśrī of Temple 4 at Ratnagiri, 9th–10th century. 
(Photo: author)
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   37 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 46] ---
Umakanta Mishra38
Saṃvara cycle, the Saṃvaroday ānāmamaṇḍalopā -
yikā , which was written by Bh ūvācārya at Rat -
nagiri before 1054 CE (Szántó 2019: 280). The 
iconographic programme in Ratnagiri also began 
to develop deities such as Heruka, Saṃvara, Va -
jravārāhī, Trailokyavijaya, Vajrahuṃkāra Yamān -
taka, Hayagrīva, Mahākāla, Aparājitā, as well as 
ḍākinī s and yoginī s (Hock 1987; Donaldson 2001: 
415–419; Mitra 1978: 86–87; Linrothe 1999). There 
are four representations of Heruka in Ratnagiri 
and none of them is found with his Prajñā, i.e. 
Vajravārāhī or Nairatmyā, as described in the He -
vajratantra . However, the Sādhanamālā  (Sādhana s 
241, 242, 244, 245; Bhattacharyya 1925) and the 
Niṣpannayogāvalī  (Bhattacharyya 1972) represent 
Heruka singly without his Prajñā , while Hevajra 
is always represented with his Prajñā in the He -vajratantra  and the Cakrasaṃvaratantra . Both 
Hevajra and Heruka are emanations of Akṣobhya 
and can be considered as an extension of Akṣobhya 
of the Yogottaratantras (Fig. 3.8: Heruka image of 
Ratnagiri).
Some of these wrathful deities, including 
Heruka, are represented as trampling on brahman -
ical deities such as Bhairava and Kālarātrī. Scholars 
like Debala Mitra have interpreted such representa -
tion as evidence of growing animosities between 
brahmanical religions and Buddhism (Mitra 1978: 
84–87). On the other hand, Sanderson argues that 
the liturgical text of Yoganiruttaratantras, such as 
the Hevajra and Cakrasaṃvara, and their prin -
cipal deities exhibit clear signs of incorporation 
of Tantric Śaiva elements into Tantric Buddhism 
(Sanderson 2009: 145–156). 
Fig. 3.7: (right) Akṣobhya surrounded by eight bodhisattvas, Udayagiri; (left) Akṣobhya surrounded by eight 
bodhisattvas, Ratnagiri. (Photo: author)
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   38 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 47] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia39
Fig. 3.8: Heruka, Ratnagiri, 10th century. (Photo: 
author)
Circulation of Dhāraṇī s and Maṇḍala s: 
Epigraphic Evidence from Odisha and 
Maritime Asia
Esoteric Buddhism circulated in maritime and 
continental Asia from the 7th century CE. Evi -
dence suggests that during the early mediaeval 
period Buddhist Tantra received patronage by 
many royal dynasties, such as the Bhauma-Karas 
in Odisha, the Pālas in Eastern India, the Early 
Second Lambakaṇṇas in Sri Lanka (with King Ag -
gabodhi and King Sena), the Śailendras in Java, the 
Tangs in China, etc. A major driving force behind 
the adoption of Buddhist Tantra were the rituals 
offered by Buddhist masters for the protection 
and prosperity of the king and the kingdom, the 
subjugation of external and internal enemies, and 
the pacification of evil influences. The patronage of 
Mantrayāna by the political elites poses the ques-
tion of the relation between the state and Esoteric 
Buddhism, which is also mirrored by the relation -ship between the former and the Tantric Śaivism 
of the Mantramārga. The belief in the magical 
power of esoteric Tantras and icons supposedly 
prompted rulers of Maritime Asia to patronize 
monks and undertake architectural projects based 
on the ideology of Caryā- and Yoga-tantras.7 This 
intimate relationship is also suggested by the fact 
that Mantrayāna employed terms such as maṇḍala , 
abhiṣeka , rājādhirāja , mantrin,  etc. that were bor -
rowed from the political lexicon of the day.
Maṇḍalas and dhāraṇīs circulated in the wider 
Maritime Asian world, and one finds numerous 
instances of those ‘cosmopolitan’ dhāraṇīs  in the 
Buddhist sites of Odisha: for example, instances of 
the Bodhigarbhālaṃkāralakṣadhāraṇī, attested in 
Ratnagiri and Udayagiri, are also found in Pahar-
pur, Nālandā, Bodhgayā, Abhayagiri in Sri Lanka, 
and Java (Schopen 2005: 306; Chandawimala 2008, 
2013; Tanaka 2014; Griffiths 2014: 161–164). One 
finds a close counterpart of the dhāraṇī slabs found 
in the Abhayagiri monastery of Sri Lanka with the 
dhāraṇī slab now kept at the Odisha State Museum. 
Schopen (2005: 306) has identified dhāraṇīs nos. 
iv and v of the Abhayagiri as quotations from 
the Ᾱryasarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhānahṛdayaguhya-  
dhātukaraṇḍamudrānāmadhāraṇīmahāyānasūtra. 
This sutra is not available in Sanskrit, but in its 
Tibetan versions. According to the introduction 
of the Tibetan version, the text was composed in 
the 8th–9th centuries CE by Vidyākaradeva. The 
text says thus, ‘O Vajrapāṇi, if someone made a 
copy of this text and puts it into a stūpa that stūpa  
would become a stūpa of the relics of the essence 
of vajra of all Tathāgatas … It would become a 
stūpa of ninety-nine millions of Tathāgatas as 
numerous as the seeds of sesame’ (ibid.). The last 
section of this dhāraṇī- sūtra also bears similarities 
with the dhāraṇī on the slab kept at the Odisha 
State Museum. The last section of this dhāraṇī  
states that anyone who ‘constructs a caitya after 
having written this dhāraṇī and throw it inside 
by the construction of that single caitya, a lakh 
7. For example, Shomu (724–749 CE) commissioned the 
installation of a gilt image of Vairocana at Todaji temple 
at Nara whose rays would help save the polity. Empress 
Hu (reign period 684–705 CE) commissioned a statue of 
Vairocana at Feng-xian temple at Longmen in 672 CE for 
similar purposes. 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   39 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 48] ---
Umakanta Mishra40
of Tathāgata-caitya will have been constructed 
by him’ (Ghosh 1941: 171–174). Out of the eight  
dhāraṇī slabs from Abhayagirivihāra, nos. vi and 
vii bear texts extrapolated from the STTS. While 
Schopen has identified dhāraṇī inscriptions nos. iv 
and v in the light of the Peking and Tibetan Kanjur 
collection, Thero Rangama Chandawimala, who 
has studied traces of tantric practices in Sri Lanka, 
has discovered that dhāraṇīs  nos. vi and vii were 
taken from the STTS,  and that the said dhāraṇī 
invokes Vairocana as well as the deified Pūjopa -
karaṇas (deified forms of instruments of worship 
such as flower, lamp, etc.), which also surround the 
Udayagiri Vairocana figure (Chandawimala 2008, 
2013). Chandiwimala’s reading is reproduced below, 
along with the parallel from the STTS.
8. Oṃ vajradhūpapūjā-spharaṇa-samaye huṃphaṭ  || Oṃ 
vajrapuṣpapūjā-spharaṇasamaye huṃphaṭ || (STTS 885) 
Oṃ vajrālokapūjā-spharaṇasamaye huṃphaṭ  || Oṃ vajra -
gandhapūjā-spharaṇasamaye huṃphaṭ || (STTS 886)Dhāraṇī  Slab No. 7 of AbhayagiriEmanation of deities from Samādhi, Ch. 2 of the 
Vajraguhyavajrama ṇḍalavidhivistara  of the STTS 
(Lokesh Chandra 1981: 35)
Oṃ guhya sarvva [sattva] vajrī hūṃ//
Oṃ guhya ratna vajrī hūṃ//Oṃ guhya dharma vajrī hūṃ//Oṃ guhya dharma [karma] vajrī hūṃ//Oṃ guhya-sattvavajrī hūṃOṃ guhya-ratnavajrī hūṃOṃ guhya-dharma vajrī hūṃOṃ guhya karma-vajrī hūṃ
Oṃ vajra guhya ratī pūjā samaye sarvva pūjā pravartaya hūṃ //
oṃ vajra guhya pūjābhiṣeka pūjā samaye sarvva pūjā pravartaya hūṃ // 
oṃ vajra guhya dhātu[gītā]pūjāsamaye sarvva pūjā pravartaya hūṃ  // 
oṃ vajra guhya nṛtya pūjā samaye sarvva pūjā pravartaya 
hūṃOṃ vajra guhya-ratī-pūjā-samaye sarvva--pūjām 
pravartaya hūṃ //
oṃ vajraguhyābhiṣeka-pūjāsamaye sarvapūjāṃ 
pravartaya hūṃ // 
oṃ vajra-guhyagītapūjāsamaye sarvapūjāṃ pravartaya hūṃ  // 
oṃ vajraguhyanṛtyapūjāsamaye sarvapūjāṃ 
pravartaya hūṃ
oṃ vajra dhūpa hūṃ
oṃ vajra puṣpa hūṃoṃ vajra dīpa hūṃoṃ vajra gandha hūṃ[cf. Ch. 6, Trailokavijayamahāmaṇḍala ]
8
oṃ vajra taila, [?] hūṃoṃ vajra… hūṃoṃ vajra… hūṃIt is worth pointing out that the invocation 
of Vairocana in the dhāraṇī slab of Abhayagiri 
mentioning dhūpa, puṣpa, dīpa and gandha may 
find a visual correspondence in the four deified 
pūjopakaraṇas of the Mahāvairocana image of 
Udayagiri in Monastery 1 (see Fig. 3.5), thereby 
attesting to a possible influence of the Sri Lankan 
version of the dhāraṇī on the making of the icon. 
The above suggests that the circulation of this 
dhāraṇī based on the STTS in Odisha and Sri 
Lanka needs to be located in the context of the 
emergence of Abhayagiri as an important centre 
of Esoteric Buddhism. A slight variation of the 
Bodhigarbhālaṃkāralakṣadhāraṇī, also in circu -
lation in the Buddhist world of Tibet, China, and 
Japan in the early mediaeval period, was found at 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   40 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 49] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia41
Udayagiri (Slab Inscription No. 27 in 21 lines, from 
Udayagiri II Report). This has been identified as 
being similar to the Ᾱryasarvatathāgatādhiṣṭhāna-
hṛdayaguhyadhātukaraṇḍamudrānāmadhāraṇī  
by Tanaka (2014: 151–161; cf. Trivedi 2011: 253; 
Mishra 2016: 72–81). 
part ii:  
esoteric buddhism in central java
Having discussed the influence of early Esoteric 
Buddhist texts such as the MVS and the STTS  
on the architecture, iconography, and epigraphy 
of Odishan sites, as well as further Yoganirut -
taratantric developments at Ratnagiri, I shall now 
turn to Central Java. This section will form a case 
study comparing and contrasting parallel devel -
opments in both areas, in the wider context of an 
interconnected mediaeval Buddhist ecumene in 
Maritime Asia.
The work by Sundberg on Abhayagiri in Sri 
Lanka and the Abhayagiri monastery referred to in 
the Ratu Boko inscription of 792 CE has uncovered 
the fascinating religious and architectural connec -
tions between the two locales, and highlighted the 
role played by Vajrabodhi in the transmission of 
Esoteric Buddhist practices and texts from South 
India and Sri Lanka to Java and then to China 
(Sundberg 2011, 2015, 2016). The Śailendra dynasty 
of Central Java lavishly sponsored monumental 
Buddhist architecture. The evidence of various 
mantras and dhāraṇīs, the esoteric manuals Saṅ 
Hyaṅ Kamahāyānan Mantranaya and Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Kamahāyānikan Advayasādhana, the biography 
of Bianhong in Kūkai’s account (Woodward 2009; 
Sinclair 2016), as well as monumental architecture 
of various temples, attest to the fact that Esoteric 
Buddhism had substantive presence in Java from 
the 8th to the 10th century CE. Mendut, Sewu, 
Plaosan and Borobudur did not evolve with higher 
order Tantras, but Esoteric Buddhism continued 
in Central and Eastern Java from the 11th century 
onwards, as suggested by the findings of the Su-  
rocolo and Nganjuk bronzes, and the evolution 
of the Śiva-Buddha cult under King Kṛtanagara 
of Siṅhasāri (r. 1268–1292) and its continuation 
well into the Majapahit period.While at Aurangabad, Ellora, Odisha, and the 
cruciform Buddhist site of Antichak and Paharpur 
the Indian architects did not attempt to replicate 
in their complete forms the Buddhist maṇḍalas 
in their constructions, in Central Java grand and 
elaborate attempts were made to give maṇḍalas 
massive physical form in masonry (Huntington 
1981; Malandra 1985). Rather than being passive 
recipients of Esoteric Buddhism from eastern or 
southern India, the Javanese builders demon -
strated their ingenuity by giving grand form and 
local idioms to textual representations in stone. 
Forming a three-dimensional stepped pyramid of 
five terraces at Borobudur, the architects inserted 
120 narrative reliefs based on the Lalitavistara onto 
the walls of Borobudur. A series of 460 bas relief 
in 2nd, 3rd and 4th galleries of the monument 
depicting Sudhana’s journey with Samantabhadra, 
drawn from the Gaṇḍavyūha and the Bhadracarī, 
is then wrapped around the upper square terrac-
es approaching enlightenment. Although some 
scholars, including Klokke (1995) and Fontein 
(2012), have contested the view that the monument 
was meant to represent a maṇḍala, they remain a 
minority; an authoritative opinion on the stūpa  
side (as well as of a general, non-tantric maṇḍala) 
is that by Snellgrove (1996). Given that all these 
analyses have some merit, it seems safe to assume 
that Borobudur incorporates elements from dif-
ferent architectural forms, being in some ways a 
stūpa, in some ways a maṇḍala, and in some ways 
something else (see below).9 By comparison with 
the Indian subcontinent (such as, for example, at 
Kesariya), the central Javanese architects were 
markedly more successful in giving the maṇḍala  
concept a concrete physical form. The architectur -
al, artistic, and textual evidence underscores that 
Central Java was an active centre of esotericism 
in Maritime Asia, and experimented with its own 
form of Esoteric Buddhism. Elaborate structures 
replicating textual maṇḍala s, their decoration with 
other popular Buddhist narratives, home shrines, 
9. For a discussion of the architectural form of the mon -
ument as responding to the need for both vertical and 
horizontal planning, see Hudaya Kandahjaya’s chapter in 
this volume.
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   41 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 50] ---
Umakanta Mishra42
and the burial of gold foils with mantras in the 
foundations of the religious structures attest to 
the functionally autonomous form of Buddhism 
that developed in Java.
The MVS ’s and STTS ’s influence on Javanese 
Art and Architecture: Mendut, Sewu, and 
Borobudur
Mendut
One of the earliest temples reflecting a maṇḍala 
design in Central Javanese architecture is Candi 
Mendut, which according to Bosch (1961), Singhal 
(1991), Lokesh Chandra (1995), and Long (2003) 
is based on the Garbhadhātu maṇḍala . With 
the entrance oriented towards north-west, the 
central cella contains Śākyamuni/Vairocana, Vajrapāṇi and Avalokiteśvara, representing the 
trikula  system, i.e. Tathāgata -, Vajra - and Pad -
ma-kula s. The trikula  system is also encountered 
in the central cella of Monastery 1 at Ratnagiri 
in Odisha, although the Tathāgata there sits in 
bhūmisparśa-mudrā  and is flanked by Vajrapāṇi 
and Avalokiteśvara. The Tathāgata in bhūmi-
sparśa -mudrā  can be identified with Akṣobhya, 
who belongs to the Vajra family. Vajrapāṇi also 
belongs to the Vajra family while Avalokiteśvara 
belongs to the Padma family. The arrangement 
found at Ratnagiri indicates that, even though it 
represents the trikula , it was most likely part of 
an Akṣobhya maṇḍala . 
The iconographic arrangement of bodhisattvas 
on the exterior wall of the Mendut temple is as 
follows:
Table 3.2 :
Bodhisattvas in the MVS and Mendut. (Photos courtesy www.photodharma.net)
MVS Candi Mendut Mudrā  and symbols Photos
Mañjughoṣa (E) Vajrapāṇi
(SE façade, left panel)r.h.: holding a vajra
l.h.: holding a pot
Kṣitigarbha (N) Kṣitigarbha 
(SE façade, right panel)r.h.: broken
l.h.: cintāmaṇi 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   42 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 51] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia43
Ᾱkāśagarbha (W) Ᾱkāśagarbha 
(NW façade, left panel)r.h.: lowered vitarka-
mudrā
l.h.: cintāmaṇi on lotus
Avalokiteśvara (NE) Avalokiteśvara 
(NW façade, right panel)r.h.: broken
l.h.: broken
Sarvanivāraṇaviṣkambhin (S) Sarvanivāraṇaviṣkambhin 
(NE façade, left panel)r.h.: varada-mudrā
l.h.: three stubs
Maitreya (NW) Maitreya 
(NE façade, right panel)r.h.: varada-mudrā
l.h.: nāgakeśara
Samantabhadra (SE) Samantabhadra 
(SW façade, left panel)r.h.: varada-mudrā
l.h.: sword
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   43 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 52] ---
Umakanta Mishra44
Sewu (Fig. 3.9)
Candi Sewu, Borobudur, and Plaosan are three 
grand Javanese Buddhist monuments giving phys -
ical form to the Vajradhātu maṇḍala (Bosch 1961: 
111; Lokesh Chandra 1995: 22–31). Candi Sewu has 
a cruciform ground plan and four stairs in the four 
directions. The central cella is surrounded by four 
sanctuaries, one of which leads into the cella from the east. It has 240 subsidiary sanctuaries. The five 
cella chambers appear to be dedicated to the five 
Tathāgatas, as in the Vajradhātu maṇḍala, with 
Vairocana/Mañjughoṣa/Mañjuvajra at the centre. 
The 25 deities that accompany the five Tathāgatas 
were kept in the five chambers with four pūjādevīs 
at the four corners of the building and eight pūjā-  
and saṅgraha-devīs housed in the medium chapel. 
The four rows of 240 subsidiary shrines housed 960 
Buddhas, apparently making it the abode of the 
Thousand Buddhas of the Bhadrakalpa (Lokesh 
Chandra 1995: 22–31). The contrast with Indian 
counterparts is striking. For instance, the execution 
of a Vajradhātu maṇḍala in Sewu is in sharp con-
trast to Ratnagiri, where Buddhas are surrounded 
by four attendant deities in groups of four. No 
Indian structure (even though the complexes of 
Paharpur, Antichak and Maināmatī have cruci -
form plans) was built as the abode of the Thousand 
Buddhas of the Bhadrakalpa. The Mañjuśrīgṛha 
inscription, found in the Sewu complex and most 
likely issued by Panaraban, is dated 792 CE, the 
same year as the Ratu Boko inscription. Scholars 
have assumed that this Mañjuśrīgṛha is identifiable 
with Candi Sewu (van Lohuizen-de Leeuw 1981: 
19–20). The Kәlurak inscription (782 CE) refers to 
the deity as Mañjughoṣa, while the Mañjuśrīgṛha 
inscription, found at the northern gate of Sewu 
during restoration, refers to the chapel of Mañjuśrī, 
suggesting a possible enlargement of the original 
temple in 792 CE. In the Dharmadhātuvāgīśvara  
maṇḍala of the Niṣpannayogāvalī (Maṇḍala no. 
21), Mañjughoṣa is the central deity and is con -
ceptualized as the ultimate substance. It is to this 
form of Mañjuśrī, i.e. Dharmadhātu Vāgīśvara, Mañjuśrī (SW) Mañjuśrī 
(SW façade, right panel)book
Fig. 3.9: Plan of Candi Sewu temple and frontal view of 
the main shrine. (Photo: author) 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   44 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 53] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia45
that the most common sacred object after a caitya, 
i.e. dharmadhātu, is dedicated in Nepal. Sylvain 
Lévi in the context of Nepal records that if a vajra  
is kept on the top of dharmadhātu, it is called va-
jradhātu, which is dedicated to Vairocana (Lévi 
1905 II: 19). The Temple 4 Ratnagiri image, which 
has been identified as Dharmaśaṅkhasamādhi, 
has been regarded as belonging to the Vairocana 
family. Mallman (1975) observes that some sort 
of unification between Mañjuśrī and Vairocana 
took place in Esoteric Buddhism in early mediae-
val India, when various forms of Mañjuśrī, such 
as Mañjuvajra and Mañjughosa, were identified 
with Vairocana and his extension Vajrasattva (cf. 
Harrington 2002: 346). Mañjuvajra is identified 
with Vairocana in Mañjuvajra maṇḍala (nos. 1 and 
20); Mañjughoṣa is identified with Vajrasattva in 
Dharmadhātuvāgīśvara maṇḍala (no. 21), and with 
Vairocana in the Durgatipariśodhana ( Maṇḍala  
no. 22) of the Niṣpannayogāvalī.
Borobudur (Fig. 3.10)
Borobudur (prob. late 8th–early 9th century) is the 
most important Buddhist monument in Central 
Java, and has been subject to many interpreta -
tions (Krom 1927; Moens 1951; Lokesh Chandra 
1980; Miksic 1990; Kandahjaya, this volume). It 
has long since been noted that the architectural 
and narrative arrangement of the bas-reliefs was 
inspired by the Gaṇḍavyūha-Bhadracarī —a man -
uscript of which was sent to China in 795 by the 
king of Odisha (Fontein 2012: 14). Boeles (1985: 12) suggested that the key to the meaning of the 
terraces and the system of Buddhas of Borobudur 
is to be found in the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra , 
or Lotus Sūtra. Countering the view that Boro -
budur is a Vajradhātu maṇḍala , Marijke Klokke 
(1995) stated that if it was a maṇḍala , why do the 
niches in the fourth gallery contain Buddha in 
vitarka -mudrā ? Highlighting the multivalence of 
Borobudur and the possible textual basis of its 
architectural and narrative plan, viz. the Sad -
dharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra , the Laṅkāvatāra-sūtra , 
Vairocana-based texts such as the STTS , and  
the Sarvadurgatipariśodhanatantra , Huntington 
(1994) argues that the overarching meaning of the 
monument intends to demonstrate the absolute 
universality of Buddhadharma as defined in the 
Avataṃsakasūtra .
On the Borobudur maṇḍala-stūpa  432 Buddhas 
face the four cardinal directions. Sixty-four 
Buddhas on the fourth gallery all sit in vitar -
ka-mudrā and face all four directions. Above them, 
on circular terraces at the summit, 72 Buddhas 
sit in Dharmacakrapravartana-mudrā inside 
latticed stūpas. As in the Vajradhātu maṇḍala, 
Borobudur has Akṣobhya in the east, Amitā-  
bha in the west, Amoghasiddhi in the north, and 
Ratnasambhava in the south set on the first three 
galleries. On the fourth gallery, the Buddhas dis-
playing vitarka-mudrā may be identifiable as Śāk-
yamuni (Fig. 3.11), who is called Sarvārthasiddhi 
in the STTS. That text states that Samantabhadra 
(defined as mind of enlightenment and as resid -
ing in the heart of all Tathāgatas) approached 
Sarvārthasiddhi (Siddhārtha) and taught him the 
five final stages of enlightenment, after which he 
attained Buddhahood. He was then consecrated 
as Vajradhātu/Vairocana. At the fourth of these 
stages, the bodhisattva was given the vajra- name 
of Vajdradhātu. After that, all the Buddhas moved 
to Vajramaṇiratnaśikhara-kūṭāgāra on the top of 
Mt Meru, the summit centre of the cosmos, where 
they blessed the Vajradhātu/Vairocana Tathāgata 
10. Line 13, śloka  5 of the Plaosan inscription refers to 
twenty Jinas along with their sons residing in the temple 
(viṃśatīha  virājante jinā jinasutānvitāḥ ; Sarkar 1971:  
48 [x]; de Casparis 1956 II: 175ff.).Fig. 3.10: Model of the Borobodur at the site museum. 
(Photo: author)
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   45 29/7/22   3:09 PM

--- [Page 54] ---
Umakanta Mishra46
as sarvatathāgata enthroned on the siṃhāsana  
facing in all directions:
There, he is joined by the Buddhas who head 
the other four Buddha families: Akṣobhya, Rat -
nasambhava, Lokeśvrarāja (Amitābha), and 
Amoghasiddhi. After further blessing them -
selves as all Tathāgatas, Vairocana enters medi -
tative stabilization and emits the essence-man -
tra ‘Vajrasattva’ from his heart, through which 
Vajrasattva, the first of the sixteen Bodhisattva 
residents of the Vajradhātu Great maṇḍala , is 
emanated. (Weinberger 2003: 73)
This STTS passage seems compatible with the view 
that Borobudur presents the four Tathāgatas in 
the niches of the three lower galleries, and Śāk -
yamuni (Sarvārthasiddhi) becoming Vajradhātu/
Vairocana Tathāgata on all sides of the fourth 
gallery. The summit of Borobudur with circles of 
latticed stūpas containing 72 icons of Vairocana in dharmacakra-mudrā would represent the kūṭāgāra 
of Mt Meru. Kazuko Ishii (1991) represented this 
in these terms: Vairocana pervades all space. Va-
jradhātu can be identified with Vairocana at the 
beginning of subsection 2 of STTS ; then Tathāgata 
Vairocana, having obtained the hṛdaya (heart) of 
Sarvatathāgata Samantabhadra, was initiated in 
the abhiṣeka of mahāmaṇiratna emerging from 
the ākāśa (space) of Sarvatathāgatas (paragraph 34 
of the STTS ). The kūṭāgāra is decorated with vajra , 
maṇi, and ratna, thus the square and rhombic 
motif of the bell-shaped latticed pattern of the 
upper terrace of Borobudur would represent that 
ornamentation (Ishii 1991: 155). 
Plaosan (Fig. 3.12)
Plaosan Lor and Plaosan Kidul are considered one 
complex. Plaosan Lor is located in the North and 
Plaosan Kidul in the South. Plaosan Lor consists of 
two main temples and an open maṇḍapa. Plaosan 
Lor has only male deities, while Plaosan Kidul has 
only female deities. The temples have upper and 
lower levels and are divided into three chambers. 
On the lower level, two life-size bodhisattvas flank 
an empty pedestal in each of the three chambers 
in each temple. The original may have had one 
Buddha seated on the now empty pedestal, possibly 
flanked by eight bodhisattvas, as in the iconograph -
ic programmes of Odisha. This could have been 
replicated in both Plaosan sanctuaries if the middle 
pedestal in the first chamber was for a Tathāgata, 
with three bodhisattvas in the next two chambers. 
However, the configuration could also have been 
Fig. 3.11: Buddha in vitarka mudrā in the fourth gallery 
identified with Śākyamunī Sarvārthasiddhi. (Photo 
courtesy Swati Chemburkar)
Fig. 3.12: Plaosan Lor shrine complex. (Photo: author) 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   46 29/7/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 55] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia47
three Buddhas and six bodhisattvas in each temple. 
The Plaosan inscription indeed refers to 20 Jinas, 
so if there were three Buddhas and six bodhisat-
tvas in the lower level, the upper level may have 
hosted Vairocana, Akṣobhya, and ten bodhisattvas, 
thereby completing the 32 deities of the Vajradhātu  
maṇḍala.10 Lokesh Chandra sees the Lor complex 
as representing the Vajradhātu maṇḍala, while 
the Kidul complex, with only female figures, he 
calls a dhāraṇī-maṇḍala (Lokesh Chandra 1995: 
167). More recently, Naoko Ito (2019) tried to iden -
tify various bodhisattvas of the north and south 
temples of Lor complex and found 89 deities in 
total. He points out that bodhisattva statues in 
the south and north room hold objects identical 
to those held by statues of Kṣitigarbha and Sa -
mantabhadra at Udayagiri, leading him to identify 
those icons as Kṣitigarbha and Samantabhadra, 
respectively (Ito 2019: 1207); further, he argues that 
the iconographical origin of the Mendut statues 
can be traced back to the caves of Ellora in West 
India and Udayagiri (ibid.: 1208; cf. Revire 2017).
While the Plaosan inscription of Dharmot -
tuṅgadeva/Panaraban is dated to 784 CE, many 
short inscriptions of the time of Rakai Garung were 
found in the subsidiary shrines, which were added 
to the main temple in the second half of 9th century 
CE (de Casparis 1958). Moreover, the Plaosan Lor 
excavation uncovered a silver and gold foil contain -
ing the Bodhigarbhālaṅkāralakṣadhāraṇī and the 
Sarvadurgatipariśodhanadhāraṇī,  plus the ‘Sūtra 
of the Great Dhāraṇī for Extinguishing the Five 
Heinous Sins’ (pañcānantaryāṇi) (Griffiths 2014: 
162–164). It is important to note that the Bodhigar -
bhālaṅkāralakṣadhāraṇī was in widespread use in 
Odisha, Nālandā, Paharpur, Abhayagiri, and other 
places in Maritime Asia (Dikshit 1938; Schopen 
2005; Mishra 2016).
Esoteric Buddhist Bronzes from East Java
Śaiva ascendancy became apparent in Central Java 
in the 9th century with the Prambanan complex. 
However, Esoteric Buddhist maṇḍala s remained 
popular in the religious landscape of Central and 
Eastern Java, as suggested by the Surocolo and 
Nganjuk bronzes (prob. 10th–11th century) , respec -
tively. In the Surocolo bronzes, Vajrasattva is the 
central deity, surrounded by 16 goddesses, viz.: four vajriṇī s, namely Rāgavajriṇī (66c), Kelikilavajriṇī, 
Manojavajriṇī, Mānavajriṇī; four pūjopakaraṇa 
deities, namely Puṣpā, Dīpā, Dhūpā, Gandhā; then 
Vajralāsyā, Vajramālā, Vajragītā and Vajranṛtyā 
in the outer enclosure corners of the maṇḍala , as 
well as the Gatekeepers Vajrānkuśī, Vajrasphoṭā, 
Vajrapāśī, and Vajraghaṇṭā. A Vajrasattva image 
from Surocolo could also be thought of as part of 
a maṇḍala  in which the central deity, Vajradhara 
is regarded as a form of Vajrasattva ( Maṇḍala  no. 3, 
Niṣpannayogāvalī 37) (Bosch 1961; Lokesh Chandra 
1995: 108–120). Other statues of the Surocolo hoard 
belong to another group, which Lokesh Chandra 
identifies as part of a Hevajra-related maṇḍala 
including the goddesses Gaurī (66P), Caurī (66N), 
Vetālī (66Q), Vaṃśā (66G), Vīṇā (66K), Mukundā 
(66H), Murajā (66J), Hayāsyā (66 M) and Sūkarāsyā 
(66 L) ( Maṇḍala  no. 5, Niṣpannayogāvalī 40). In 
fact, the Ṣaṭsāhasrikāhevajraṭīkā , a commen -
tary on the Hevajratantra,  relates that the great 
bliss ( mahāsukha ) is Vajrasattva, who is Hevajra 
(Shendge 2004: 163). However, it appears that 
between Yogatantras like the STTS  and Yoginītan -
tras like the Cakrasaṃvara  and Hevajra  there were 
intermediate Tantras, known as Yogottaratantra, 
such as Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara , 
which spread through Southeast Asia and China 
and may have also inspired the maṇḍala  arrange -
ments found in East Java (Szántó and Griffiths 
2015). The Nganjuk bronzes have been regarded as 
part of the Vajradhātukarma maṇḍala (rather than 
of mahā-maṇḍala ) where Vairocana is four faced 
and not surrounded by four goddesses (Singhal 
in Lokesh Chandra 1995: 97–109).
conclusion
This chapter has argued that Odisha emerged 
as an early centre of Esoteric Buddhism that 
hosted monks and masters at the complexes of 
Ratnagiri, Udayagiri, and Lalitagiri. These sites 
developed iconographic programmes based on 
esoteric maṇḍala s. Lalitagiri holds the earliest 
epigraphic citation from the MVS  along with 
an Abhisambodhi Vairocana statue and, at the 
same time, attests to iconographic evidence of the 
Garbhadhātu  maṇḍala  and Vajradhātu maṇḍala , 
as well as of substantive use of the Bodhigarbhā-  
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   47 29/7/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 56] ---
Umakanta Mishra48
laṅkāralakṣadhāraṇ ī, which Śubhākarasiṃha  
may have transmitted to China. Thus, Odisha 
appears to have played a role as one of the major 
nodes for the circulation of the Esoteric dhāraṇī s 
and maṇḍala s that flourished in other areas of 
Maritime Asia, including Java.
The cumulative architectural evidence of 
Mendut, Sewu, Borobudur, and Plaosan, as well as 
contemporaneous textual and art historical remains, 
suggests that key texts such as the MVS and STTS 
were also at the basis of the esoteric doctrinal con-
figuration of Buddhism in Central and East Java 
from the 8th to the 11th century. Javanese Esoteric 
Buddhism however developed autonomously into 
a unique and grand Buddhist maṇḍala architecture 
that offered more faithful representations in stone 
of the key texts than it was ever achieved in Odisha 
and other areas of the Indian subcontinent. Fur -
thermore, whereas the iconographic programmes 
in Central Java ended with Caryā-  and Yoga-tantras, 
Ratnagiri further developed a programme based 
on the Anuttarayogatantras, which also found an 
expression in later East Javanese sites.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2015. ‘Revisiting the Cult of “Śiva 
Buddha” in Java and Bali’, in D. Christian Lammerts (ed.), Buddhist Dynamics in 
Premodern and Early Modern Southeast Asia, 
pp. 261–282. Singapore: Institute of Southeast 
Asian Studies.
. (ed.). 2016. Esoteric Buddhism in 
Mediaeaval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak 
Institute. 
Bagchi, Prabodh C. 1946. ‘Bodhisattva-Śīla of 
Śubhākarasiṃha’, Sino-Indian Studies 1/3: 
132–160.
Bandyopadhyay, Bimal. 2007. Excavations at 
Udayagiri-2 (1997-2000) (Memoirs of the 
Archaeological Survey of India 100). Delhi: 
Archaeological Survey of India.
Baruah, Bibhuti. 2000. Buddhist Sects and Sectar-
ianism. Delhi: Sarup & Sons.
Bernet Kempers, A.J. 1933. ‘The Bronzes of Nālandā 
and Hindu Javanese Art’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 90: 1–88.Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh. 1925. The Sādhanamālā, 
2 parts. Gaekwad Oriental Series 26 & 41. Baroda: 
Oriental Institute.
. 1967. The Guhyasamāja Tantra or Tathāga -
taguhyaka . Gaekwad Oriental Series 53. Baroda: 
Oriental Institute.
. 1972. Niṣpannayogāvalī: of Mahāpaṇḍita 
Abhayākaragupta. Gaekwad Oriental Series 109. 
Baroda: Oriental Institute.
. 1980. An Introduction to Buddhist Esoterism. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.
Boeles, Jan. 1985. The Secret of Borobudur. Bangkok: 
White Lotus Press.
Bosch, F.D.K. 1961. Selected Studies in Indo -
nesian Archaeology. The Hague: Martinus  
Nijhoff.
de Casparis, Johannes G. 1956. Selected Inscriptions 
from the 7th to the 9th Century A.D. Bandung: 
Masa Baru.
. 1958. Short Inscriptions from Tjandi Plaosan-
Lor (= Berita Dinas Purbakala 4). Jakarta: Dinas 
Purbakala.
Chandawimala, Rangama. 2008. ‘Esoteric Buddhist 
Practice in Ancient Sri Lanka’, The International 
Journal of the Humanities 5/12: 89–102.
. 2013. Buddhist Heterodoxy of Abhayagiri 
Sect. A Study of the School of Abhayagiri in 
Ancient Sri Lanka. Saarbrücken: LAP LAMBERT 
Academic Publishing.
Chattopadhyaya, Debiprasad (ed.). 2010. Tāranā-
tha’s History of Buddhism in India, translated 
by Alaka Chattopadhyaya and Lama Chimpa. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. Reprint 
of 1980 edition.
Chou Yi-Liang. 1945. ‘Tantrism in China’, Harvard 
Journal of Asiatic Studies 8/3–4: 241–332.
Das, S.C. (ed.). 1908. Pag Sam Jon Zang. Calcutta: 
Calcutta University.
Davidson, Ronald. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: 
A Social History of the Tantric Movement. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Dawa-Samdup, Kazi. 1987. Śrī-Cakraśaṁvara-
Tantra. A Buddhist Tantra. New Delhi: Aditya 
Prakashan.
Dikshit, Kashinath N. 1938. Excavations at Paha -
rpur, Bengal (Memoirs of the Archaeological 
Survey of India 55). Delhi: Archaeological 
Survey of India.
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   48 29/7/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 57] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia49
Donaldson, Thomas E. 1995. ‘Probable Textual 
Sources for the Buddhist Sculptural Maṇḍalas 
of Orissa’, East and West 45/1: 173–204.
. 2001. Iconography of the Buddhist Sculp -
tures of Orissa, 2 vols. Delhi: Indira Gandhi 
National Centre for the Arts/Aryan Book.
Fontein, Jan. 2012. Entering the Dharmadhātu: A 
Study of the Gaṇḍavyūha Reliefs of Borobudur. 
Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Ghosh, A. 1941–1942. ‘Khadipada Image Inscription 
of the Time of Subhakara’, Epigraphia Indica  
26: 247–248.
Giebel, Rolf W. 2005. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi 
Sūtra, Translated from the Chinese (Taishō, 
vol. 18, no. 848). Berkeley: Numata Center for 
Buddhist Translation and Research.
Goble, Geoffrey. 2019. Chinese Esoteric Buddhism: 
Amoghavajra, the Ruling Elite, and the Emer -
gence of a Tradition . New York: Columbia 
University Press. 
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. ‘Written Traces of the 
Buddhist Past: The Mantras and Dhāraṇīs 
in Indonesian Inscriptions’, Bulletin of the  
School of the Oriental and African Studies 77: 
137–194. 
Guenther, Herbert V. 1969. The Royal Song of 
Saraha: A Study in the History of Buddhist 
Thought. Seattle and London: University of 
Washington Press.
Hakeda, Yoshito S. 1972. Kūkai: Major Works 
Translated with an Account of His Life and a 
Study of His Thought. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Harrington, Laura. 2002. A View of Mañjuśrī: 
Wisdom and its Monastic Crown Prince in Pāla 
India. PhD dissertation, Columbia University, 
New York. 
Hock, Nancy. 1987. Buddhist Ideology and the 
Sculpture of Ratnagiri: Seventh through Thir -
teenth Centuries. PhD dissertation, University 
of Berkley, California.
Hodge, Stephen. 2005. The Mahāvairocana 
Abhisambodhi Tantra with Buddhaguhya’s 
Commentary. Oxon: Routledge Curzon.
Huntington, John C. 1981. ‘Cave Six at Aurangābād: 
A Tantrayāna Monument?’, in Joanna G. Wil-
liams (ed.), Kaladarśana, pp. 47–55. Delhi: 
Oxford University Press.. 1994. ‘The iconography of Borobudur 
revisited: The concepts of śleṣa and 
sarva[buddha]kāya’, in Marijke J. Klokke and 
Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer (eds.), Ancient 
Indonesian Sculpture, pp. 133–150. Leiden: 
KITLV Press.
Ishii, Kazuko. 1991. ‘Borobudur, the Tattvasaṃgraha, 
and the Sang Hyang Kamahāyānikan’, in 
Lokesh Chandra (ed.), Art and Culture of 
South-East Asia, pp. 151–164. New Delhi: 
International Academy of Indian Culture and 
Aditya Prakashan.
Ito, Naoko. 2019. ‘On the Groups of Buddhist 
Statues Outside the Temples in Candi Plaosan, 
Central Java’, Journal of Indian and Buddhist 
Studies 67/3: 1203–1209.
Kar, K.K. 1989. Aścarya Caryācaya (O). Bhubane-
swar: Orissa Sahitya Akademi.
Klokke, Marijke J. 1995. ‘Borobudur, a Mandala? 
A Contextual Approach to the Function and 
Meaning of Borobudur’, in IIAS Yearbook 1995, 
pp. 191–219. Leiden: IIAS.
Krom, N.J. 1927. Borobudur, Archaeological 
Description. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, J.E. 1981. ‘The dvārapāla  
of Barabuḍur’, in Luis Gomez and Hiram W. 
Woodward Jr. (eds.), Barabuḍur: History and 
Significance of a Buddhist Monument, pp. 15–23. 
Berkeley: Asian Humanities. 
Lin Pei-Ying. 2017. ‘A Comparative Approach 
to Śubhākarasiṃha’s (637–735) “Essentials of 
Meditation”: Mediation and Precepts in Eighth 
Century China’, in Yael Bentor and Meir Shahar 
(eds.), Chinese and Tibetan Esoteric Buddhism, 
pp. 121–146. Leiden: E.J. Brill. 
Linrothe, Rob. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: Wrath-
ful Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan Esoteric Art. 
Boston: Shambhala Publications. 
Lokesh Chandra. 1980. ‘Borobudur as a Monument 
of Esoteric Buddhism’, The Southeast Asian 
Review 5/1: 1–41.
. 1995. ‘Chandi Sevu as a Stereomorphic 
Vajradhātu-Maṇḍala’, The Cultural Horizons 
of India IV, pp. 10–22. Delhi: International 
Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya 
Prakashan.
Lokesh Chandra and David L. Snellgrove. 1981a. 
Sarva-Tathāgata-tattva-saṅgraha: Facsimile 
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   49 29/7/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 58] ---
Umakanta Mishra50
Reproduction of a Tenth Century Sanskrit 
Manuscript from Nepal. New Delhi: Sharada 
Rani.
. 1981b. Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgraha: 
Facsimile Reproduction with Summary of 
Contents. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.
Long, Mark. 2009. Candi Mendut: Womb of the 
Tathāgata. Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Malandra, Geri H. 1985. ‘Ellora: The “Archaeology” 
of a Maṇḍala’, Ars Orientalis 15: 67–94.
de Mallmann, Marie-Thérèse. 1975. Introduction 
à l’iconographie du tântrisme bouddhique. 
Bibliothèque du Centre de Recherches sur 
l’Asie Centrale et la Haute Asie, vol. I. Paris: 
Librairie Adrien Maisonneuve.
Miksic, John. 1990. Borobudur: Golden Tales of 
the Buddhas. Berkely and Singapore: Periplus 
Editions.
Mishra, Umakanta. 2009. Vajrayāna Buddhism: 
Study in Social Iconography. Delhi: Pratibha 
Prakashan.
. 2016. ‘Dhāraṇīs from the Buddhist Sites 
of Odisha’, Pratnatattva 22: 73–84.
. 2018. ‘Inscribed Buddhist Images and 
Copperplates from Odisha: An Analysis of the 
Social Background of Donors and Issues of 
Brahmanical-Buddhist Relations’, Pratna Sa-
miksha 9: 69–94.
Mishra, Umakanta and Subrata Kumar Acharya. 
2016. ‘Buddhist and Śaiva Ācāryas (Preceptors) 
in Newly Discovered Inscriptions of Early 
Medieval Odisha, India’, Pratna Samiksha 7 : 
23–35.
Mitra, Debala. 1978. Bronzes from Achutarajpur. 
Delhi: Agam Kala Prakashan.
. 1981–1983. Ratnagiri 1958–61, 2 vols. Delhi: 
Archaeological Survey of India.
Moens, J.L. 1951. ‘Barabudur, Mendut en Pawon 
en hun onderlinge samenhang’ [Borobudur, 
Mendut and Pawon and their mutual 
relationship], Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 84: 326–386.
Patnaik, J. 2017. Excavation Report of the Buddhist 
Site of Lalitagiri (Memoirs of the Archaeolog-
ical Survey of India). Delhi: Archaeological 
Survey of India.
Pinte, Klaus. 2011. ‘Śubhākarasiṃha’, in Charles D. 
Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard K. Payne (eds.), Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras 
in East Asia, pp. 339–341. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Revire, Nicolas. 2017. ‘From Gandhāra to Java? A 
Comparative Study of Bhadrāsana Buddhas 
and their Related Bodhisattva Attendants 
in South and Southeast Asia’, in Anna L.  
Dallapiccola and Anila Verghese (eds.), India 
and Southeast Asia: Cultural Discourses,  
pp. 279–304. Mumbai: K.R. Cama Oriental 
Institute.
Roerich, George N. 1959. The Blue Annals (2 parts). 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.
Sahu, Nabin Kumar. 1958. Buddhism in Orissa. 
Bhubaneswar: Utkal University. 
Sanderson, Alexis. 2007. ‘The Śaiva Exegesis of 
Kashmir’, in Dominic Goodall and André 
Padoux (eds.), Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire 
d’Hélène Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory 
of Hélène Brunner, pp. 231–442. Pondicherry: 
Institut français d’Indologie / École française 
d’Extrême-Orient.
. 2009. ‘The Śaiva Age: The Rise and 
Dominance of Śaivism during the Early 
Medieval Period’, in Shingo Einoo (ed.), Genesis 
and Development of Tantrism, pp. 41–349. 
Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University 
of Tokyo.
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan. 1971. Corpus of the In -
scriptions of Java (Corpus Inscriptionum Javan -
icarum), up to 928 AD, 2 vols. Calcutta: Firma 
K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Sawa, Ryūken 佐和隆研 . 1982. Mikkyō bijutsu no 
genzō: Indo Orissa chihō no bukkyō iseki 密教美
術の原 像 インド・オリッサ地方の仏教遺蹟  
[Prototypes of esoteric Buddhist art: Buddhist 
sites in Orissa]. Kyoto: Hōzōkan.
Schopen, Gregory. 2005. Figments and Fragments 
of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai’i Press.
Sharrock, Peter. 2016. ‘Seeds of Vajrabodhi: 
Buddhist Ritual Bronzes from Java and Khorat’, 
in Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in 
Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons, pp. 237–252. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute. 
Shendge, Malati J. (ed.). Ṣaṭsāhasrikā-Hevajra-ṭīkā: 
A critical edition. Delhi: Pratibha Prakashan.
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   50 29/7/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 59] ---
Circulation of Buddhist Maṇḍalas in Maritime Asia51
Sinclair, Ian. 2016. ‘Coronation and Liberation 
According to a Javanese Monk in China: 
Bianhong’s Manual on the abhiṣeka of a 
cakravartin’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric 
Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 29–66. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute. 
Singhal, Sudarshana Devi. 1991. ‘Candi Mendut and 
the Mahāvairocana-Sūtra’, in Lokesh Chandra 
(ed.), Art and Culture of South-East Asia,  
pp. 373–384. New Delhi: International Academy 
of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan.
Snellgrove, David. 1996. ‘Borobudur: Stūpa or 
Maṇḍala?’, East and West 46/3–4: 477–483.
Snodgrass, Adrian. 1988. The Matrix and Diamond 
World Maṇḍalas in Shingon Buddhism,  
2 vols. Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture.
Sundberg, Jeffrey R. 2003. ‘A Buddhist Mantra 
Recovered from the Ratubaka Plateau’, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  
159: 163–188.
. (In collaboration with Rolf W. Giebel). 
2011. ‘The Life of the Tang Court Monk 
Vajrabodhi as Chronicled by Lü Xiang ( 呂向 ): 
South Indian and Śrī Laṅkān Antecedents to 
the Arrival of the Buddhist Vairayāna in 
Eighth-Century Java and China’, Pacific World: 
Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, 
Third Series 13: 129–222.
. 2015. ‘The Abhayagirivihāra’s Pāṃśukūlika 
Monks in Second Lambakaṇṇa Śrī Laṅkā and 
Śailendra Java: The Flowering and Fall of a 
Cardinal Center of Influence in Early Esoteric 
Buddhism’, Pacific World: Journal of the 
Institute of Buddhist Studies, Third Series 16: 
49–185.
. 2016. ‘Mid-9th-Century Adversity for 
Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java: 
Lord Kumbhayoni and the “Rag-wearer” 
Paṁsukūlika Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra’, 
in Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in 
Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons, pp. 349–380. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.
Szántó, Péter-Dániel. 2019. ‘Minor Vajrayāna 
texts V: The Gaṇacakravidhi attributed to Ratnākaraśānti’, in Nina Mirnig, Marion 
Rastelli, and Vincent Eltschinger (eds.), 
Tantric Communities in Context, pp. 275–314.  
Wien: Österreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften.
Szántó, Péter-Dániel and Arlo Griffiths. 2015. 
‘Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara’, in 
Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, and 
Vincent Eltschinger (eds.), Brill’s Encyclope -
dia of Buddhism, Vol. 1, pp. 988–1009. Leiden:  
Brill.
Tanaka, Kimiaki. 2014. オリッサ州ウダヤギリII出
土の石刻陀羅尼について  [A Newly Identified 
Dhāraṇī-sūtra from Udayagiri II], The Memoirs 
of Institute for Advanced Studies on Asia 166: 
124(161)–34(151).
. 2018. An Illustrated History of the Maṇḍala: 
From its Genesis to Kālacakratantra. Boston: 
Wisdom Publications.
Tripathy, Snigdha. 1997. Inscriptions of Orissa 
(c. Fifth-Eighth Centuries AD), vol. I. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.
Trivedi, P.K. 2011. Further Excavations at 
Udayagiri-2, Odisha (2001-03) (Memoirs of 
the Archaeological Survey of India 104). Delhi: 
Archaeological Survey of India.
Van Kooij, Karel R. 1972. Worship of the Goddess 
According to the Kālikā Purāṇa. Leiden: E.J. 
Brill.
Wayman, Alex. 1977. Yoga of the Guyhasamājatan -
tra: The Arcane Lore of Forty Verses. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. 
Weinberger, Steven N. 2003. The Significance  
of Yoga Tantra and the Compendium of 
Principles (Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra) within 
Tantric Buddhism in India and Tibet. PhD 
dissertation, University of Virginia. 
Williams, Joana. 1986. ‘Unfinished Images’, India 
International Centre Quarterly 13/1: 90–105.
Woodward, Hiram. 2009. ‘Bianhong, Mastermind 
of Borobudur?’, Pacific World: Journal of 
Institute of Buddhist Studies, Third Series 11: 
25–60.
Yamamoto, C. 1990. Mahāvairocana-sūtra  
(tr). Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture.
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   51 29/7/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 60] ---
03_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   52 29/7/22   3:10 PM

--- [Page 61] ---
part II
JAV A AND ITS TRANSLOCAL ECHOES
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   53 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 62] ---
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   54 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 63] ---
1
introduction
Borobudur sits right in the centre of the island 
of Java. When it was rediscovered in 1814, 
this magnificent temple was buried in the 
jungle, and Java at that time was under the British 
rule. Attempts to solve the mysteries of Borobudur 
started soon thereafter.
In 1927 Krom listed nearly 300 publications 
related to Borobudur studies already in print.2 
Toward the end of the 20th century this number 
has grown to over 500.3 Study after study has at-
tempted to reveal the monument’s origin, meaning, 
or function. And yet, from these studies and at 
least from the time Borobudur undergone the first 
major restoration (1907–1911), it has also become 
clear that we do not have any lucid historical data 
beyond what is left of the structure itself. This has 
not only hampered any attempts to understand 
Borobudur as a whole, but also led to more and 
more controversies. One can see the debate de -
veloping over time and through many eminent 
scholars’ contributions to Borobudur studies.4
1. This chapter is an update of my views expounded in 
various previous publications (Kandahjaya 1995, 1998, 2004, 
2009, 2016). I draw relevant passages from those and inte -
grate them to form a synthesis in this publication.
2. See Krom 1927 II: 333–351.
3. The number 500 was mentioned in Satyawati Suleiman 
1983: 7. The same number was referred to by the late Prof. 
Soekmono in his Foreword to Kandahjaya 1995 ( ibid.: xvi).
4. A synthesis of such debates was produced at two in -
ternational Borobudur conferences: one at the University 
of Michigan in 1974 and another in Kyoto in 1980. Both 
were programmed during the period when Borobudur 
was undergoing the second major restoration. Diverging Chapter 4
The Scheme of Borobudur1
Hudaya Kandahjaya
Divergences are quite healthy and fairly 
common in scholarship when they lead us to 
enhance our understanding of the subject matter. 
But when we examine how these divergences have 
arisen and developed in Borobudur studies, the 
result is not very encouraging. We find some alarm -
ing indications that raise even more substantial 
questions about the processes with which studies 
on Borobudur have been carried out. Perhaps it 
suffices to say for the moment that, facing such a 
vicious circle, no one needs to wonder any longer 
why the current state of knowledge of Borobudur 
is so confusing. At least, when the word ‘mystery’ 
in Borobudur studies presents itself,5 one may 
now realize that after almost two centuries from 
the rediscovery of Borobudur the word is more 
likely an expression of desperation than wonder. 
Until recently there has been no solid answer to 
many fundamental problems of Borobudur: no 
clear explanation or consensus on what Borobudur 
is, why the builders built it, not even about the 
meaning of its name. As such, despite the long 
history of Borobudur studies, there has been so 
far no indication that we are getting closer to at-
taining the goal of an improved understanding of 
opinions about Borobudur suggested by specialists were 
fully exposed and recorded in conference proceedings: see 
Gomez and Woodward 1981 and Executive Committee for 
the International Symposium on Chandi Borobudur 1981. 
The most recent publications on Borobudur include Voûte 
and Long 2008, Woodward 2009, Gifford 2011, and Fontein 
2012.
5. See Bernet Kempers 1976 (being the English translation 
of Borobudur: Mysteriegebeuren in steen, verval en restau -
ratie, Oudjavaans volksleven , 1974); Miksic 1999.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   55 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 64] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya56
the monument. Instead, in spite of much scholarly 
effort, previous studies on Borobudur have in fact 
generated many more complications than answers. 
At this point, as both the knowledge of Borobudur 
and the approach leading to the attainment of such 
knowledge seems to be in flux, we are led not only 
to enter into a very complex dilemma but also to 
find the best way out of this predicament. While 
no conclusive support for any particular interpre-
tation is to be found yet, the state of affairs of the 
field invites us to seriously reflect on some lingering 
issues. Not only have inconclusive sets of data or 
suppositions and questionable inferences crept 
into the research process, whether deliberately or 
not, but they have also often taken on a life of their 
own and caused further misinformation, which in 
due course would just lay additional veils rather 
than augmenting our knowledge on Borobudur.
For this reason, rather than making up or 
relying on one’s own projection, we should pay 
more attention to the actual data available to us. 
The evidence could be in situ and in the near con-
temporary or related materials. In addition, we 
ought to be reminded from the start that Borobu-
dur was not born out of nothing. It was not built 
simplistically, or haphazardly, but systematically 
and in a harmonious and well-balanced manner. 
To think otherwise will surely undermine the 
complexity and the grandeur of Borobudur itself. 
Thus, the assumption would be that it must have 
been designed by architects equipped with high 
expertise. They must have composed it through a 
proper concept and a grand plan, which in turn 
governed its construction. Along this line of think -
ing, it is probably still also within the realm of 
possibility that we would be able to capture its 
meaning if we were able to expose the underlying 
idea behind the creation of Borobudur that im -
pelled and inspired the sponsors, the architects, 
and the users of that time. Instead of projecting 
our own ideas into Borobudur, we should try to let 
Borobudur and other related evidence reveal their 
own valuable information. Relying on our own 
imagination rather than Borobudur’s own data 
will lead us astray instead of helping us understand 
the monument properly. Thus, a more fruitful ap-
proach would be to first understand the factors that 
enabled the Javanese to build the monument at its  site. This can be done by examining relevant events 
surrounding the construction of Borobudur.6 Then, 
when all available evidence is allowed to manifest 
its concealed information, chances are we will get 
closer to uncovering the intended scheme. Still, 
even if it is not an easy task, a promising approach 
would be to reverse engineer the whole structure, 
so as to grasp not just the architects’ know-how but, 
more importantly, the fundamental concepts that 
inspired the monument. Following that approach, 
this study will revisit a number of important but 
often underappreciated aspects of Borobudur.
original scheme
The first solid evidence related to the original 
scheme of Borobudur probably lies in the report by 
Ijzerman, Chairman of the Archaeological Society 
in Yogyakarta. In 1885 Ijzerman discovered the 
hidden foot underneath the broad base terrace 
of the structure (Der Kinderen 1886a: 156; 1886c: 
160–162; Ijzerman 1886: 261–268). On the wall of 
this hidden foot a series of 160 panels of reliefs 
and some inscriptions were found. In 1890–1891, 
van Kinsbergen’s student, Kassian Cephas, took 
photographs of those reliefs (Groeneveldt 1891: 
100–101). Then, the hidden foot was covered again 
with the stones that originally encased it.
Based on these photographs, scholars were able 
to investigate a number of short inscriptions en-
graved on some of the panels. These allowed them 
to determine the date and the execution of the 
reliefs. On paleographic grounds, scholars believed 
that Borobudur was built in between 750 and 850. 
Reigning in Central Java in that period was the 
Śailendra Dynasty, which scholars believed to have 
adhered to Buddhism.
6. Since Borobudur lies in the interchange between South 
Asia and East Asia, where Buddhism passed through via 
the sea-routes, maritime Buddhist transmission must be 
examined to help unravel the sources, people, and histor -
ical events that made the construction of the monument 
possible. A detailed study on this issue is Kandahjaya 2016; 
studies reevalauting the significance of maritime transmis -
sion of Buddhism and the pivotal role of insular Southeast 
Asia in the Buddhist world are Kandahjaya 2004 and Acri 
2018a, 2018b.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   56 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 65] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur57
The concealment of the lower level of Borobu-
dur has puzzled scholars. Theories abound, and 
according to Jan Fontein (1989: 79) these can be 
divided into two main groups. The first argues 
that the change was dictated by real or imagined 
structural requirements. These theories suggest 
that expansion in the lower level was needed to 
strengthen the foundation of the construction in 
order to prevent the monument from collapsing 
(Dumarçay 1985: 41). The second group opposed 
this argument, considering that the construction 
of the processional path was a deliberate act meant 
to convey a profound symbolism.
The hidden foot was not the only place where 
Borobudur was obviously modified during its con -
struction. In between 1907 and 1911, while running 
the first major restoration project to safeguard the 
monument, van Erp discovered that there was an 
unfinished large lotus pedestal on the top of the 
square platform underneath the circular terraces, 
a modification on the first balustrade, and stone 
fragments of the umbrella pinnacle of the main 
stūpa . The discovery of this pedestal led scholars to 
believe that a larger stūpa was originally designed 
to crown Borobudur (Pott 1909: 2–8; Chihara 1996: 
114–116), even though there was no clear explana-
tion as to why this idea was eventually abandoned.
Whatever the aim of these architectural changes 
might have been, one thing is obvious: the process 
of determining the configuration of Borobudur 
must also take into account these modifications. 
Recently, one scholar has done exactly this: Daigoro 
Chihara. Benefitting from his involvement in the 
second major restoration of Borobudur in the 1970s 
and 1980s, Chihara employed newly obtained data 
on the architectural changes, which prompted him 
to suggest that those were meant both to alleviate 
structural problems as well as to boost the monu-
ment’s symbolism. In this way, he simultaneously 
proposed an enhanced solution to the problem of 
the meaning of Borobudur, concluding that it must 
have been multifold (Chihara 1981: 144; 1996: 112-
122; cf. Miksic 1999). To support this conclusion, he 
suggested the existence of an underlying concept of 
multiplicity and uniformity beneath the construc-
tion of Borobudur. However, the difficulty with 
his view is that he, too, was convinced that ‘it was obvious that Borobudur was not the product of one 
consistent plan from beginning to end’ (Chihara 
1981: 136). Thus, despite his insightful suggestion, 
Chihara failed to provide sufficient evidence for 
the link between the concept of the monument’s 
multiplicity and uniformity on the one hand and 
its inconsistent and evolving planning on the 
other. Also, when Chihara attempted to adopt the 
structural requirement argument to explain the 
enclosure of the original foot of Borobudur, he 
supported it by presenting an additional discovery, 
namely the slippage in the northern side of the first 
floor. Still, the overall reasoning of this argument 
is unsatisfactory. First, looking at a photograph 
taken in the 1900s, it may be appreciated that the 
wall of Borobudur was not only subsiding, but was 
also breaking up from the top.7 If this was what 
happened in the early days, even from a technical 
perspective, the added foot would certainly not 
have been able to correct this structural problem. 
Second, if a structural failure was the reason for 
the enclosure, then it is only natural to expect 
that the builders would keep to a minimum the 
load pressing on the first floor. However, this was 
not the case. Instead of minimizing the load, we 
know that the first balustrade was greatly expanded 
(Krom 1927 I: 28–29; Bernet Kempers 1981: 96). 
Third, the argument clearly does not seriously take 
into account the fact that the hidden foot contains 
some reliefs that were not only unfinished (e.g., 
panel O-41) but also deliberately obliterated (e.g., 
panel O-51). Thus, the modification must have been 
caused by factors arising from beyond the civil 
engineering realm.
In the meantime, since it was determined that 
Borobudur had already started to deteriorate just 
a decade after its first major restoration, the In -
donesian government asked UNESCO for help in 
1955 and again in 1967. With international aid, and 
in the hope of sustaining the existence of Boro -
budur for many years to come, the second major 
reconstruction effort took place from 1973 to 1983. 
7. See Krom and van Erp 1920–1931: portfolios; Bernet 
Kempers 1976: 188; Executive Committee for the Interna -
tional Symposium on Chandi Borobudur 1981: 9, 13, 25–26; 
UNESCO 2005: 86, 102–103, 126, 128, 130, 132.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   57 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 66] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya58
During that period, a team of archaeologists dug up 
new artifacts from the Borobudur yard. Thousands 
of stūpikās and a couple of inscriptions written on 
metal plates were unearthed. The team published 
their valuable discoveries in reports (Boechari 1982; 
Boechari and Ongkodharma 1982; Hariani Santiko 
1975: 68–76). One report written by prominent In-
donesian epigraphist Boechari described a series of 
excavations, their locations, and their findings, in -
cluding a transcription of the famous lead-bronze 
plate inscription. A preliminary attempt to read 
the inscription indicated that its contents and style 
looked like those of a dhāraṇī. The second report 
discussed the thousands of clay stūpikās dug out 
from the yard. Boechari conjectured that these 
stūpikās were produced in the second half of the 
9th century, while the lead-bronze plate was dated 
to one to two decades earlier. 
The new findings are significant as they provide 
us with a new opportunity to understand the reason 
why the builders made such a drastic change. As 
far as the lead-bronze plate is concerned, recent 
research has confirmed that it contains a dhāraṇī, 
which actually finds a parallel in a Balinese stuti 
(hymn of praise) entitled Navakampa, or ‘The Nine -
fold Tremble’.8 This dhāraṇī, which has been identi -
fied by Griffiths (2014) as the Mahāraudranāmahṛ -
daya (‘The Greatly Ferocious Spell’), invokes a 
fierce form of Vajrapāṇi (Caṇḍavajrapāṇi as Ma-
hāyakṣasenāpati). One line can be reconstructed as 
namo bhagavato mahāvajradharasya. This phrase 
indicates that the Buddhists of Borobudur knew 
the term vajradhara. This information reminds us 
of a site for the Vajradhara school (Old Javanese: 
kabajradharan) named Buḍur in the Deśavarṇana/
Nāgarakṛtāgama (Canto 77.1, Robson 1995: 180), an 
Old Javanese text dated to the 14th century. Schol-
ars dispute whether Buḍur refers to Borobudur. 
Those rejecting any link between Borobudur and 
Tantric Buddhism find reasons to dissociate the 
monument and the place name. But on the basis 
of the available evidence, it would be unreasonable 
8. I first reported this in Kandahjaya 2009. In modern 
Bali, the Navakampa is recited in a death ritual, as well as 
in daily rituals. Perhaps it is reminiscent of an older rite 
performed at Borobudur. For a thorough study on this 
lead-bronze inscription, see Griffiths 2014.to surmise that the Buddhist architects and users 
of Borobudur did not know the concept of va-
jradhara.9 Therefore, the association with a site for 
the Vajradhara school named Buḍur found in the 
Deśavarṇana could be taken as the survival of an 
earlier historical link between the monument and 
a form of Mantranaya/Vajrayāna Buddhism that 
was practised in Central Java, and that continued 
in East Java up to the end of the Hindu-Buddhist 
period on the island.
As for the miniature stūpas, it must be noted 
that they are inscribed with an abbreviated form of 
the formula oṃ ye te svāhā in Old Javanese script 
(Boechari 1982: 93), indicating that the Javanese 
builders and users of Borobudur were familiar with 
the concept of dharmakāya-caitya (a caitya of the 
Dharma body), and particularly with caityavan -
dana (worship of caitya) (Tucci 1988: 27–29; Li 
2000: 138). Yijing states that producing and offering 
a miniature stūpa is believed to generate merit 
(Li 2000: 108, 137–138). Familiarity with a dhar -
makāya-caitya implies that the constructed stūpa  
does not necessarily contain relics (Tucci 1988: vii, 
24). In the light of the above, one may surmise that 
the Javanese must have understood that by building 
such stūpa (or caitya, as these terms are often in-
terchangeable) they would renew the preaching of 
the Dharma, gain merit and accumulate knowledge, 
grasp the law of causation, and have the vision of 
the Buddha (Tucci 1988: 28–32).
The material findings described above can be 
matched with evidence from the monument itself. 
A pair of short inscriptions on the wall above the 
panel O-124 at the Borobudur hidden foot, de -
picting the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra, are obviously 
related to the practice of worshipping a caitya. The 
short inscriptions are caityavandana (worship of 
caitya) and suvarṇavarṇa (golden colour) (Der 
Kinderen 1886b: 27–28). The panel below this pair 
starts with a display of eight persons in the act of 
worshipping a caitya and then the reward section 
under suvarṇavarṇa shows a distinguished person 
sitting on a platform attended by a group of five 
9. Additional evidence that was found near Borobudur in 
1970 was a 1.9 cm bronze vajra . See Bernet Kempers 1976: 
16 and UNESCO 2005: 150.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   58 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 67] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur59
ordinary persons. Sylvain Lévi (1931: 4) was the 
first to identify the following passage of the Kar-
mavibhaṅgasūtra as being related to the phrase 
and depiction of caityavandana:
Which are the ten benefits to be derived from 
the worshipping of the sanctuaries of the 
Tath āgata? The answer is: One becometh beau -
tiful; fair-voiced; persuasive of speech; when 
entering an assembly, one winneth the good -
will of that assembly; one becometh beloved 
of gods and men; one becometh an important 
person; one associateth with important per -
sons; one associateth with the Buddhas and 
with the Disciples of the Buddhas; one gaineth 
a great position; one is reborn in Heaven; one 
will quickly attain Parinirv āṇa.
The phrase suvarṇavarṇa  is found in the verse that 
follows the above (Lévi 1931: 5; 1932: 38):
By means of a steambath and an ointment of 
orpiment,
And by the gift of an umbrella, I have acquired 
this gold-coloured complexion.
Above and beyond Lévi’s discovery, the sig -
nificance of the whole panel including its inscrip-
tions is enormous as it connects well with those 
thousands of miniature stūpas unearthed from 
the Borobudur yard. For this reason, considering 
the inscription of caityavandana, the thousands 
of miniature stūpas, and naturally Borobudur 
itself, we can be virtually certain that, in addition 
to an advanced level of doctrinal understanding, 
the architects of Borobudur must also have had 
access to manuals for stūpa or caitya construction. 
A number of scholars have investigated and docu-
mented some Buddhist scriptures which prescribe 
a set of techniques for building a stūpa (Tucci 1988: 
13–21; Roth 1980; Dorjee 1996: 1–21).10 According to 
their examination, a stūpa structurally comprises of 
two main components: (1) the (lion) throne, which 
is often missed in the production of stūpa tsa-tsa, 
and (2) the stūpa proper (Tucci 1988: 15–17; Dorjee 
1996: 61). The stūpa proper comprises mainly eight 
10. There are additional resources, e.g., B énisti (1960); see 
also Maurer (2005), which unfortunately I have not been 
able to consult before this chapter was finalized. parts: (1) a base of ten virtues (Tib. dge-ba bcu; Skt. 
daśa kuśala) at the bottom with a shape following 
the steps above the base; (2) a flight of steps which 
are square, circular, or polygonal in shape; (3) a 
base for the dome; (4) the dome; (5) the harmika  
in rectangular or polygonal form; (6) the spire; (7) 
the wheels; and (8) the umbrella (Tucci 1988: 40–43; 
Dorjee 1996: 61–71). If we compare and tabulate 
the structure of Borobudur with the structure of a 
stūpa proper, we find more correspondences than 
differences (see Table 4.1).
changes to the original scheme
From the comparison in Table 4.1, it is clear that 
if it were not for the changes at the base and at the 
top, Borobudur would have perfectly fit the struc -
ture of a stūpa . While this brings us back to the 
same old question as to why the architects made such changes, a better understanding of the eight 
different types of stūpa s would seem to lead us to 
a possible answer, especially when we recall that 
the dominant set of miniature stūpa s from Boro -
budur yard has a more elongated aṇḍa  with eight 
subsidiary stūpikā s around it. Those eight types 
are of two categories: (1) four commemorating 
essential moments of his earthly life, and (2) four 
commemorating some of his most famous mira -
cles (Tucci 1988: 24). These eight stand in contrast 
with the initial four commemorating the Buddha’s 
life as recommended by the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra  
(Lévi 1932: 82–83). This divergence suggests that 
the original idea was to construct Borobudur to 
commemorate just the first four.
Each one in this series of eight stūpas has some 
specific features, usually on its steps, which then 
differentiate one from another. A comparison 
between the features of these eight stūpas and 
Borobudur is shown in Table 4.2. From this table 
we can appreciate that, except for the octagonal 
shape in the stūpa of Reconciliation, most of the 
main features of the eight stūpas are remarkably in 
harmony with prominent features of Borobudur. 
Also, except for two types of stūpas, i.e. those of 
Victor and Parinirvāṇa, all the remaining stūpas 
have four steps, and this feature can be related to 
the four polygonal platforms or altars at Boro -
budur. The 108 niches and the four doors of the 
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   59 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 68] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya60
stūpa of Preaching correspond neatly to the 108 
niches and four doors at each side of Borobudur 
(Tucci 1988: 128, 142). The bell-shaped dome of 
the stūpa of Parinirvāṇa matches the bell-shaped 
dome of the main stūpa of the monument. The 
ladders demanded by the stūpa of Descent from 
Trayastriṃśa and the reliefs demanded by this 
stūpa as well as by the Grand Miracle are all present 
at Borobudur. Should there be no expanded base, 
even the requirement for a base of ten virtues is 
fulfilled by the now hidden foot of the construction, 
along with reliefs from the scripture on ten good 
and bad deeds (the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra). But the 
most fascinating feature in this list is perhaps the Table 4.1 : 
A stūpa  proper vis-à-vis Borobudur
Structure of a Stūpa Symbolic Meaning Borobudur
Umbrella Great compassion 
(mahākaruṇā )(Three umbrellas were installed by van Erp for experiment in 1910 and subsequently removed)
Wheels Ten knowledge-powers (daś a 
jñāna-balāni )(Nine wheels were installed by van Erp for 
experiment in 1910 and subsequently removed)
Spire (yaṣṭi) Ten knowledges (da śa jñānāni ) (The spire for the abandoned original main stūpa  
is unknown); now the octagonal spire of the 
main stūpa
Harmikā/droṇa Eightfold path (aṣṭāṅga-mārga) (The harmikā  for the abandoned original main 
stūpa  is unknown); now the quadrangular 
harmikā of the main stūpa
The dome (kumbha /aṇḍa) Seven factors of enlightenment (sapta bodhyaṅgāni)(The dome for the abandoned original main stūpa  is unknown); now the dome of the main 
stūpa
The base of the dome (kumbha sandhī /kaṇṭhaka )Five powers (pañca balāni ) The base of the dome for the abandoned original main stupa , now hidden underneath the first 
circular terrace
The steps (cataś ro vedyaḥ, 
caturthā jaṅghā vedī): 4Five faculties (pañcendriyāni ) 4th platform or altar in polygonal shape
(tṛtīyā vedī): 3 Four spiritual powers (catvāri 
ṛddhipādā )3rd platform or altar in polygonal shape
(dvitīyā vedī ): 2 Four renunciations (catvāri 
prahāṇāni)2nd platform or altar in polygonal shape
(ādhāra vedī ): 1 Four awareness (catvāri smṛtyupasthāna)1st platform or altar in polygonal shape
The base of ten virtues Ten virtues (da śa kuśala) Hidden foot with reliefs from the scripture on ten good and bad deeds (the Karmavibhaṅgasūtra)
stipulation of having three circular steps for the 
stūpa  of Victor, which at Borobudur are not located 
where they are supposed to be but on top of the 
four polygonal platforms or altars. There is also an 
exclusive requirement for the stūpa of Parinirvāṇa, 
which at Borobudur is again fulfilled uniquely by 
placing the whole solid bell-shaped stūpa on top 
of the third circular terrace. Nonetheless, it is spe-
cifically from the last two requirements that we 
can perceive the architects’ need to change the top 
of Borobudur as well as their desire to conform 
to all specifications at once. In other words, on 
the basis of these correspondences, it is likely that 
by creating such changes and organization the  
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   60 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 69] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur61
architects seem to have intended to make Borobu-
dur to integrate all the major features and thereby 
represent all the eight stūpas.
assignment of numbers
Van Erp must have noticed the numerical arrange -
ment of Borobudur during the restoration. He 
did tabulate the arithmetical progression of the 
number of the Buddha statues from the lower to 
the top storeys (Krom and van Erp 1931 II: 463). But 
it was Stutterheim (1956: 50, 59–61) who addressed 
this phenomenon for the first time, although he 
did not seem to find the exact reason behind it. 
Indeed, the scholarship of his time was not yet 
aware of the calculation and planning methods for 
setting up a maṇḍala  prescribed by Vajrabuddhi 
(aka Vajrabodhi) and his disciple Amoghavajra, 
who might have met in Java before or at the time 
of Borobudur’s construction (Sundberg and Giebel 
2011: 151–153).
Vajrabuddhi’s description on how to construct 
a Vajradhātu maṇḍala is based on his interpre -
tation of the Vajraśekharasūtra (Snodgrass 1988: Table 4.2 :
Eight stūpa s vis-à-vis Borobudur
Type of Stūpa Site Main Features Borobudur
1 Birth 
(Heap of Lotuses)Kapilavastu Four (or seven) steps with lotusesFour polygonal platforms or altars
2 Enlightenment Nairañjan ā-Magadha Square; four steps above 
a base of ten virtuesFour polygonal platforms or altars above the hidden foot 
with reliefs from the scripture 
on ten good and bad deeds (the 
Karmavibhaṅgasūtra)
3 Preaching 
(Many Doors)Vārāṇasī 108 niches; four doors in four sides are four truths108 niches each in four sides
4 Grand Miracle Jetavana-Śrāvastī Square; four steps and 
reliefs in four sidesFour polygonal platforms or altars and reliefs
5 Descent from TrayastriṃśaKānyakubja-Sāṃkāśya Ladders; four (or eight steps) and reliefsFour polygonal platforms or altars; stairs in four sides and reliefs
6 Reconciliation Rājagṛha Octagonal; four steps Four polygonal platforms or altars
7 Victor (Meditation on Life)Vaiśālī Three circular steps Three circular terraces
8 Parinirvāṇa Kuśinagara Bell-shaped dome without stepsBell-shaped dome of the main stūpa
572–575, 579–585). He explains that this maṇḍala  
has rectangular and circular shapes. The rectan -
gular shape is for marking the boundaries of the 
maṇḍala. The circular shape defines the vajra circle 
and the five buddha-circles. In this maṇḍala, the 
radius of the central buddha-circle is one third of 
the radius of the vajra circle, and the size of the 
other four buddha-circles is the same as the central 
one. These four other circles are placed tangentially 
to the central circle in the four cardinal directions. 
Finally, eight vajra lines are to be drawn tangen-
tially to these four circles.
In addition, Vajrabuddhi also describes the 
overall size of the maṇḍala and the number of 
bhagavat s to be placed in it. For a master (ācārya ) of 
great and awesome virtue, the size of the maṇḍala  
is about three feet. The size of the maṇḍala created 
for a Jambudvīpa king or a wheel-turning king, 
however, is one yojana. By having these different 
sizes, the ācārya, as the creator of the maṇḍala, has 
options to choose from (see Li 2000: 79). Likewise, 
the creator is presented with a variety of options to 
select when it comes to the number of the bhaga-
vats, that is, either 37 or 108.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   61 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 70] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya62
Looking at all sides of Borobudur there are 108 
Buddha statues in niches on each side facing each 
cardinal direction. Also, the outline of the horizon -
tal layout or the shape of all polygonal platforms 
on rectangular terraces resembles the shape of the 
vajra lines as described by Vajrabuddhi. As such, 
it is likely that the architects of Borobudur utilized 
Vajrabuddhi’s manual from the start for the hori-
zontal planning, in addition to the stūpa construc -
tion manual for the vertical planning. This becomes 
clearer when the changes on the upper part of 
Borobudur are taken into account, as the outline 
of the original plan would never fit Vajrabuddhi’s 
manual. On the other hand, it is also from these 
changes that we can sense another possible influ-
ence on the masterplan of Borobudur, namely from 
Bianhong, a Javanese monk who went to China to 
study Esoteric Buddhism under Huiguo, himself a 
disciple of Amoghavajra. Bianhong’s whereabouts 
after his master died in 806 CE are not completely 
known. While Sinclair (2016: 29–66) has argued 
that he might never have left China, I suspect 
that, as already surmised earlier (Kandahjaya 
1995: 82–83; 1998: 189; 2004:107–108; Woodward 
2009), the assignment of numbers at Borobudur 
might have come through Bianhong, who went to China to grasp the complementary part of the Va-
jradhātu maṇḍala, i.e., the Garbhadhātu maṇḍala. 
The distribution of the 504 Buddha statues and 
1460 panels of reliefs at Borobudur would seem 
to follow an arithmetical calculation prescribed by 
Amoghavajra in a construction manual for laying 
out a Garbhadhātu maṇḍala.
The construction of a Garbhadhātu maṇḍala  
following Amoghavajra’s interpretation of the 
Mahāvairocanābhisambodhisūtra  starts with a 
gridwork of three by three (Snodgrass 1988: 175–
178; Hodge 2003: 104; Giebel 2005: 31). This grid-
work of three by three is a depiction of the three 
mysteries of the body, mind, and speech and they 
correspond to the three qualities of Mahāvairocana, 
i.e., meditation, knowledge, and compassion. Since 
the gridwork shows the innumerable mysteries 
of Mahāvairocana, we can further subdivide each 
square by three to create a nine-by-nine gridwork. 
Afterward, a layering process takes place. The nine-
by-nine gridwork now consists of three layers and 
one central square (see Fig. 4.1).
In this maṇḍala construction, the central square 
becomes known as the central mansion. From this 
central mansion out, the three layers of Borobudur 
comprise the first, second, and third layers of the 
Fig. 4.1: Amoghavajra’s odd-number gridwork for creating a Garbhadh ātu maṇḍala.  
3 × 3 gridwork: 3 mysteries (body, speech, mind) and 3 qualities (meditation, knowledge, 
compassion) of Mahā vairocana 
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   62 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 71] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur63
gridwork for drawing the maṇḍala. The first layer 
consists of 16 squares, the second of 24 squares, 
and the third of 32 squares. These numbers are 
exactly the same as the numbers of the perforated 
stūpas above the three circular terraces on top of 
Borobudur.
If we continue to apply this procedure by subdi -
viding further the nine-by-nine gridwork by three 
to create a 27-by-27 gridwork, and then we also 
apply the layering process, we would then obtain an 
interesting set of numbers representing the squares 
on the six outer layers: starting from the inner one, 
we would get 64, 72, 80, 88, 96, and 104 squares (see 
Fig. 4.2). If we examine these numbers, we note two 
remarkable facts. First, except for the numbers 80 
and 96, the remaining ones are exactly the same 
as the numbers of buddha statues sitting on top of the fifth, fourth, third, and first balustrades of 
Borobudur. Second, the total of these numbers is 
504. This total is exactly the same as the number 
of all finished buddha statues found in Borobu -
dur (see Table 4.3). Moreover, we would obtain 
similar results when we apply the same procedure 
to compute the distribution of panels of reliefs 
carved at Borobudur.
This arithmetical calculation becomes vital 
when we take into consideration the fact that, as 
mentioned earlier, the construction of Borobudur 
has undergone several modifications. While insert -
ing the circular terraces and the main stūpa above 
the top polygonal altar, the architects ingeniously 
represented in the monument the numbers from 
the gridwork of a Garbhadhātu maṇḍala. The diam-
eter of the main stūpa is also made one third of the 
Fig. 4.2: 27-by-27 gridwork applied to the Borobudur
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   63 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 72] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya64
diameter of the first circular terrace in accordance 
with the procedure for constructing a Vajradhātu  
maṇḍala. This means that the builders deliberately 
attempted to include measures obtained from the 
geometrical and arithmetical computations into 
their building scheme. In other words, in addition 
to the Vajradhātu maṇḍala, the construction of a 
Garbhadhātu maṇḍala based on the interpretation 
of the Mahāvairocanābhisambodhisūtra  was likely 
one of the underlying plans that inspired the con-
struction of Borobudur. From this realization it 
necessarily follows that those geometrical models 
and arithmetical calculations were transmitted 
to Central Java either by Amoghavajra when he 
stopped by Java on the way to Sri Lanka or perhaps 
by Bianhong, considering the fact that he studied 
the Garbhadhātu maṇḍala under Huiguo, and that 
his calculations might have helped the builders to 
draw the final design of Borobudur.Table 4.3 : 
Odd-number gridwork for the numerical series of the buddha images
stūpa-prāsāda
A reference to the region of the Indian subcon -
tinent that was frequently visited by the Buddha 
is reflected by a phrase in verse 13 of the Kayum -
vuṅan inscription, which describes the bud -
dha-temple ( jinamandiraṃ ) that I identify with 
Borobudur as being ‘similar to the famous Ve ṇu-
vana’ ( śrīmadveṇuvanābhikhyam ). Ve ṇuvana, a 
forested area near R ājgir ( rājagṛha ) in present-day 
Bihar (ancient Magadha), was the first royal dona -
tion to be granted to Buddha Gautama in the year 
after he attained full enlightenment. Later this gift 
became a precedent for establishing a ruling for 
the monks in accepting similar donations. The 
Apadāna Commentary explains the extraordinary 
quality of the offering of Ve ṇuvana. When King 
Bimbis āra poured water onto the Buddha’s palms 
in the ceremony for the endowment of Ve ṇuvana, 
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   64 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 73] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur65
the water fell to the ground and the earth shook. 
This was the only park donation in Jambudvīpa 
that was accompanied by an earthquake.11 Fur -
thermore, the Avadānakalpalatā composed by K ṣe-
mendra12 continued the tradition of admiring the 
gift of Ve ṇuvana. He emphasized that the bequest 
of Ve ṇuvana caused jealousy among the contem -
poraneous six tīrthika s, who felt being outrivaled 
and deprived of provisions.13 More importantly, 
this rivalry was the underlying rationale for the 
great miracles occurring at the gate of Śr āvastī, 
where Ś ākyamuni displayed the illustrious double 
miracle of producing flames from the upper part 
of the body and a stream of water from the lower, 
and vice versa, also from the right side of his body 
and from the left (Pali yamakapātihāriya , Skt. yam -
akaprātihārya ).
A substantial number of accounts asserting 
the significance of miraculous events in the life of 
Śākyamuni are also found in a number of sūtras, 
such as the Lalitavistara and the Gaṇḍavyūha. 
Both of these sūtras are thoroughly depicted at 
Borobudur and must have been incorporated into 
its narrative programme for a good reason. Some 
concepts pertinent for the study of the monument 
are discussed below.
The Lalitavistara narrates at length the life story 
of Śākyamuni up to his turning of the Dharma 
wheel. The absence of an account of the Buddha’s 
11. Apadāna-Aṭṭhakathā  (1998: 97): tasmiṃ ārāme  
paṭiggahiteyeva  ‘buddhasāsanassa mūlāni otiṇṇānī ’ ti 
mahāpathavī kampi. Jambudīpatalasmiñhi ṭhapetvā veḷu-
vanaṃ aññaṃ mahāpathaviṃ kampetvā gahitasenāsanaṃ 
nāma natthi . The English translation for this text is avail -
able from tipitaka.wikia.com and https://www.wisdomlib.
org/buddhism/book/apadana-commentary-atthakatha.
12. The Kashmirian K ṣemendra flourished in the 11th 
century, and is therefore later than the Borobudur. However, 
my point here is simply to highlight the importance of this 
episode in the Buddhist tradition, both before and after the 
date of Borobudur.
13. Vaidya (1959): pure rājagṛhābhikhye bimbirāseṇa 
bhūbhujā  / pūjyamānaṃ jina dṛṣṭvā sthitaṃ veṇuvanā śrame 
// 13.2 … bimbisāro narapatir mūrkhatāpakṣapātavān / 
anyaṃ vrajāmo bhūpālam iti te samacintayan  // 13.13. An 
English translation of chapter 13 on prātihārya can be found 
in D ās (1897: 17–20), while Black (1997) provides an English 
translation of the Tibetan abridgement of K ṣemendra’s 
Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā .passing away cogently intensifies a doctrinal po-
sition that elevates Śākyamuni to divine status. In 
a similar way, the title of the text seems to suggest 
an eternal cosmic play. This is the story that the 
architects of Borobudur picked to be carved exten -
sively and elegantly on the first gallery wall. The 
divine birth narrative draws our attention. Looking 
at the Lalitavistara  reliefs of the birth story, Krom 
(1927: 112) rightly noticed the double wall—instead 
of triple—of the kūṭāgāra  in which the bodhisattva 
dwelled while descending from the Tuṣita heaven 
and entering his mother’s womb. Assuming that 
the text consulted by the architects was similar to 
the form in which it has been transmitted to us, and 
acknowledging their mastery of the details reported 
in the text, the discrepancy seems to be intentional 
rather than accidental. The whole structure of the 
monument would represent, as it were, the absent 
third wall of the kūṭāgāra depicted in the relief. 
In fact, there are compelling reasons to believe 
that Borobudur represents the Javanese image of the kūṭāgāra of Śākyamuni, which carries with it 
many unusual properties and also interchangeable 
terms, such as garbha (‘womb’) or śrīgarbha (‘il -
lustrious womb’), ratnavyūha (‘jeweled sanctum’), 
and caitya (‘shrine’).
The fact that the Gaṇḍavyūha reliefs occupy 
a large portion of the Borobudur walls is well 
known—indeed, the complete narrative of the 
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra in 460 panels of reliefs is the only 
one in the world. This sūtra starts with the Buddha 
staying at the kūṭāgāra in the Jeta Grove in the park 
of Anāthapiṇḍada, in Śrāvastī. Scrutinizing the site 
at which the whole Gaṇḍavyūha narrative was set 
reveals precious information. The sūtra specifically 
states that the kūṭāgāra, not just the Jeta Grove, is 
the site at which all started. While the initial setting 
appears to be historical, the events narrated in 
the text soon become increasingly ahistorical and 
cosmological in character. When it records the 
bodhisattvas in attendance, the sūtra systematically 
arranges 152 names in fifteen categories. Most of 
the categories are grouped by tens, except for the 
category of eyes (netra), which includes twelve 
names. Ten out of fifteen categories create five pairs 
of categories—each of these pairs has a synonymic 
category (see Table 4.4).
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   65 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 74] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya66
The importance of the eyes becomes clear in 
subsequent events, when the bodhisattvas alone 
are able to witness the Buddha’s spiritual power 
manifested in this very kūṭāgāra. This seems to 
have been the rationale for the Javanese architects 
to take the events narrated at the beginning of 
the sūtra seriously, as the scene is depicted in the 
first two panels introducing the series of Gaṇḍa-  
vyūha reliefs (Panels II1 and II2). In support of 
this view there is the fact that other depictions of 
the Gaṇḍavyūha elsewhere in Asia jump to the 
beginning of Sudhana’s pilgrimage and miss out 
the introductory part altogether.14
As the narrative shifts to Sudhana’s pilgrimage, 
it must be noted that, according to Qobad Afshar 
(1981), the places visited by Sudhana as he circled 
the Indian subcontinent (Jambudvīpa) form a cir-
cumambulating programme in which the pilgrim 
proceeds southward from one kalyāṇamitra to the 
next, going deeper into the human realm, until 
reaching Magadha in the centre and entering into 
14. Chinese as well as Tibetan Gaṇḍavyūha paintings start 
with the meeting of Sudhana with Mañju ṣrī (see Lokesh 
Chandra 1975; Klimburg-Salter 1998: 120–121; Li n.d.; Stein -
kellner 1995). At Borobudur, the meeting with Mañjuśrī is 
on Panel II16; the first 15 panels show the introductory part.Maitreya’s kūṭāgāra, which at this point is identical 
to the magnificently adorned abode of Vairocana or 
the universal cosmos (vairocanavyūhālaṅkāragar -
bhamahākūṭāgāra). The mention of Maitreya’s 
kūṭāgāra in the Tuṣita heaven brings to mind the 
story relating to the kūṭāgāra of Śākyamuni as told 
in the Lalitavistara. As we compare this and other 
features, it becomes clear that to some extent the 
Gaṇḍavyūha and the Lalitavistara have many par-
allels and are thereby closely correlated.
These correlations suggest that the Gaṇḍavyūha 
could be conceived as a generalized Lalitavistara, 
while the Bhadracarī is the summary of all of them. 
This enforces the idea of an eternal cosmic play, es -
pecially when we also take into account the Jātakas 
and the Avadāna s, which make up all the texts that 
the architects of Borobudur selected to be immor-
talized on the Borobudur walls. Thus, it appears that the rationale underlying the selection of the 
episodes depicted in the reliefs was the conduct 
of the bodhisattva or the Buddha, including their 
related sacred sites and objects worthy of worship. 
This consideration must have been well known at 
that time since the composer of the Kayumvuṅ-  
an inscription employed the phrase ‘Buddha’s 
conduct’ (vuddhacarita) in composing verse 4 Table 4.4 : 
Categories of bodhisattvas’ names
Group #Number of 
bodhisattvasBodhisattvas’ Ending namesNumber of 
bodhisattvasSubtotals Meaning
1. 10 -uttarajñ ānī -buddhī 10 20 supra-knowledge, 
or intelligence
2. 10 -dhvaja -ketu 10 20 banner
3. 9 -tejā -prabh ā 11 20 light
4. 10 -garbha 10 womb
5. 12 -netra 12 eyes
6. 10 -mukuṭa -cūḍa 10 20 crown, or crest
7. 10 -ghoṣa -svara 10 20 voice, or sound
8. 10 -udgata 10 come out
9. 10 -śrī 10 auspicious
10. 10 -indrarāja 10 Lord
Subtotals 101 51 152 Total
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   66 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 75] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur67
to graciously honour the religious demeanour of 
Princess Prā modavarddhanī.
Some insights that may be relevant to the 
study of Borobudur come from the very titles of 
the Lalitavistara and Gaṇḍavyūha. Unlike the 
Lalitavistara (‘The Play in Full’ or ‘Detailed Nar-
ration of the Sport [of the Buddha]’), the meaning 
of the title Gaṇḍavyūha is far from clear, especially 
when the Chinese counterparts of Gaṇḍavyūha  
and Buddhāvataṃsaka are alternative titles, not 
direct translations, as is obvious from the following 
comparison (Table 4.5).
A search for the meaning of gaṇḍa exposes two 
interesting senses, i.e., ‘stalk’ (‘trunk’) and ‘goitre’, 
which are interrelated by way of being the interstice 
between two knots. Further, Gaṇḍa is the name of 
the gardener serving Prasenajit, the king of Kauśala. 
He offered a mango to the Buddha. The mango 
seed produced the mango tree (Pali gaṇḍamba) at the gate of Śrāvastī, under which Śākyamuni 
performed the double miracle (Pali yamakapāti-
hāriya; Skt. yamakaprātihārya).
The word gaṇḍa used in the meaning of ‘(tree) 
trunk’ is very well attested in the Divyāvadāna. 
It appears in compounds, such as mūlagaṇḍapa -
trapuṣpaphala (Vaidya 1999: 63, 68, 130, 215, 413, 
428). This compound enumerates in an orderly 
fashion the components of a tree from the bottom 
to the tip: ‘root, trunk, leaf, flower, fruit’. As such, 
when the Gaṇḍavyūha records nānābodhigaṇḍa-  
vyūhān (Vaidya 1960: 214), the word gaṇḍa in this 
compound most likely has the same meaning, so 
that nānābodhigaṇḍavyūhān are the ‘various 
ornamented trunks of (trees of) enlightenment’. 
But, given that the compilers did not bother to 
include nānābodhi or bodhi in the title, it might 
just be the case that a broader meaning is intend-
ed. The trunks might include other trees under 
Table 4.5: 
The Avataṃsakasūtra
60 Fascicles 80 Fascicles 40 Fascicles
No.
 Taishō KoreanT 278K 79T 279K 80T 293K 1262
Title Sanskrit
 Chinese
 Tibetan(Buddha )avataṃsakasūtra
Dafangguang fohuayan jing
大方廣佛華嚴經
Sangs-rgyas phal-po-che shes-bya-ba 
shin-tu-rgyas-pa-chen-po-gyi mdo(Buddha )avataṃsakasūtra
Dafangguang fohuayan jing大方廣佛華嚴經
Sangs-rgyas phal-po-che shes-bya-ba-
shin-tu-rgyas-pa-chen-po-gyi-mdoGaṇḍavyūhasūtra
Dafangguang fohuayan jing大方廣佛華嚴經
Translation Translator
 DateBuddhabhadraBegun on the 10th day, 3rd month, 
14th year of I Hsi (義煕), Eastern Chin dynasty (東晉) (April 30th, 418 CE) and finished on the 28th day, 12th month, 2nd year of Yung Ch’u (永初), Liu Sung dynasty 
(劉宋) (February 5th, 422 CE) in Tao-ch’ang Monastery (道場寺), Y ang-chou (楊州).Śikṣānanda
Begun in 695 in Biankongsi (遍空寺), 
Tung-tu (東都), and finished on the 8th day, 10th month, 2nd year of Sheng Li (聖歷), Tang dynasty (唐) (November 5th, 699 CE) in Fo-shou-chi Monastery (佛授記寺), Lo-yang (洛陽).Prajña
Offered to the 
emperor of theTang dynasty  (唐) on March 16th, 798 CE.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   67 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 76] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya68
which Buddha’s miraculous events occurred; thus, 
Gaṇḍavyūha could also mean ‘detailed explana -
tion or description of (tree) trunk (miraculous 
events)’. This meaning of gaṇḍavyūha still shares 
the miraculous context in which the compound 
buddhāvataṃsaka is found in the Divyāvadāna  
(Vaidya 1999: 257–258). Now, it turns out that 
buddhāvataṃsaka may have two meanings, de -
pending on how one interprets this compound. 
One is ‘the garland of the Buddha’ (Rhi 1991: 305). 
The second is ‘the garland of buddhas’ (Susumu 
2007: 90). Of these two meanings, the one most 
clearly manifested at Borobudur is ‘garland of 
buddhas’. But, then, as both titles—Gaṇḍavyūha  
and Buddhāvataṃsaka—turn out to arise from 
the great miracle in Śrāvasti, this clearly shows the 
weight of this event.
Now, considering the portrayal of kūṭāgāra in 
the Lalitavistara, which is considered comparable 
to the circular terraces of Borobudur, it is worth 
noting that this text mentions the compound 
kūṭāgāra-prāsāda at least six times in various 
contexts. Then, if we recall that the Lalitavistara  
interchanges a caitya with a kūṭāgāra, and in front 
when discussing a stūpa construction a caitya is 
interchangeable with a stūpa, we may come to 
an understanding through a process of substi -
tution that the phrase kūṭāgāra-prāsāda could 
and might have eventually been transformed into 
stūpa-prāsāda. The latter is a term that I have thus 
far not found recorded anywhere else except in 
the Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan Advayasādhana,  
which declares: ‘This body inside and outside is a 
stūpa-prāsāda’ (Kats 1910: 53).
All background stories on miraculous events 
mentioned above and the spiritual power glorified 
in them might have truly captivated the Javanese 
masterminds of Borobudur. This fascination 
perhaps could also explain the use of the word 
amitavala (infinite power) in the Kayumvuṅan in -
scription to portray the quality of the Hero abiding 
on the lofty mountain ( uttuṅga śailastha śūro), who 
in turn may protect suffering beings. At the same 
time, it is possible that the description could also 
mean that the power was regarded as being em -
bedded not only in the main deity but also in the 
whole structure—the stūpa-prāsāda.the lord of all virtues
The notion of spiritual power embedded in the 
stūpa-prāsāda  just mentioned may be associated 
with the name Śrīghanan ātha in verse 11 of the 
Kayumvuṅan inscription. In Sanskrit, the word 
ghana  possesses a wide range of meanings, viz. ‘a 
striker’, ‘solid, dense’, ‘complete’, ‘a multitude’, ‘a 
cloud’, and ‘the cube of a number’ (Monier-Wil -
liams 2005 [1899]: 376). The word Śrīghana is a 
well-attested epithet of the Buddha (or a buddha), 
as well as exalted monks, in Buddhist literature 
and epigraphy in both South and Southeast Asia 
(see Skilling 2004). Even so, its occurrence in the 
Old Javanese inscription could be significant, as 
this name appears—as Śirighana, or Śrīghana—in 
the first verse 1 of chapter 24 ( Trapuṣa-bhallika ) of 
the Lalitavistara —a scripture that is represented 
prominently on the reliefs carved on the Borobu -
dur walls. The verse is as follows: ‘I praise the feet 
of Śrī Ghana, overspread with a thousand-spoke 
chariot-wheel, which, having the radiance like the 
glowing countless-petaled lotuses, are continually 
rubbed by the tiaras of the gods.’15 The same verse 
attests the usage of the word ara , being a spoke 
of a wheel. The word ara  appears in verse 8 of the 
Kayumvuṅan inscription.
Assuming that the Chinese translators of the 
Lalitavistara encountered the epithet Śirighana 
in the Sanskrit manuscripts they were translating, 
their translations as fo (Buddha, 佛)16 or shizun 
(Bhagavat or the Blessed One, 世尊 )17 confirm 
that this epithet refers to the Buddha. But it is 
equally imperative to note that translators of the 
15. Vaidya 1958: 269. The Sanskrit verse runs as follows: 
rathacaraṇanicitacaraṇā da śaśatārajalajakamaladalatejā 
/ suramukuṭaghṛṣṭacaraṇā vande caraṇau ś irighanasya  
// 1. The Chinese translation by Div ākara (T 187, Fang -
guang-dazhuangyan-jing  方廣大莊嚴經 ) has it as follows:  
世尊足有千輻輪 猶如蓮華甚清淨 恒為諸天寶冠接 是故我
今稽首禮  (T 187 599b27–28).
16. T 186, Puyao-jing  普曜經: 常奉行諸行 悅寂句威力 
使魔失徑路 自投稽首佛  (T 186 525a3–4). Comparing this 
passage with T 187 in the previous note, I have the impres -
sion that Dharmarak ṣa might have had a slightly different 
recension.
17. See note 15.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   68 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 77] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur69
Samādhirājasūtra18 rendered the same term as 
‘the assembly of all merit and virtue’ (gongde ju ,  
功德聚 ), that is the Buddha, or ‘a stūpa as symbol of 
Buddha’.19 Still, on the other hand, gongde ju  功德聚  
can come not only from Śrī Ghana, but also from 
the Sanskrit guṇagaṇa20 (‘multitude of virtues’) and 
saṃbhāra (usually ‘assembly of merits and knowl-
edge’).21 Some passages in the Lalitavistara22 and the 
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra23 corroborate this identification.
18. Wogihara 1979: 1356. Vaidya 1961, verse 106 in chapter 
35, ‘Supu ṣpacandra’: hā suvratā kṣāntitapodhanāḍhyā 
hā rūpadākṣiṇyaguṇair upetā  / hā niṣkuhā śrīghana 
niṣprapañcā kuha prayāto ’si vihāya mā tvam // 106; verse 
2 in chapter 36, ‘Śīlaskandhanirdeśa’: tasmāt samagrā bha -
vatha aduṣṭacittāḥ sarve ca bhogā satata manāpakārī / 
dṛṣṭvā ca buddhān śirighana aprameyān bodhiṃ spṛśitvā 
bhaviṣyatha dharmasvāmī  // 2.
19. Soothill and Hodous 1977: 168.
20. Hirakawa 1997: 200.
21. The Lalitavistara  expounds a somewhat detailed 
and elaborate understanding of the Buddhist concept of 
saṃbhāra . As already noted by some lexicographers, the 
Lalitavistara  shows two more saṃbhāra s, i.e., ś amatha-
saṃbhāra  (accumulations of tranquility) and vidar śanā-
saṃbhāra  (accumulations of insight), in addition to the 
usual puṇya-saṃbhāra  (accumulations of merits) and jñā -
na-saṃbhāra  (accumulations of knowledge); see, e.g., Mon -
ier-Williams 2005 [1899]: 1179, and Edgerton 1970: 580; on 
p. 487 Edgerton indicates that vidar śanā  is a synonym for 
vipa śyanā . All of these four saṃbhāra s are members of the 
108 doors into the light of the dharma ( dharmālokamukha ). 
But the Lalitavistara  does not stop there: it also indicates 
that saṃbhāra  may include other kinds of excellent attrib -
utes. In chapter 27, ‘Nigama’, the compiler lists eight kinds 
of saṃbhāra s, including the four just mentioned. These 
eight are: accumulations of charity ( dāna-saṃbhāra ), mo -
rality ( śīla-saṃbhāra ), sacred word ( śruta-saṃbhāra ), tran -
quility ( śamatha-saṃbhāra ), insight ( vidar śanā-saṃbhāra ), 
merits ( puṇya-saṃbhāra ), knowledge ( jñāna-saṃbhāra ), 
and great compassion ( mahākaruṇā-saṃbhāra ).
22. At least two passages: (1) in chapter 2, ‘Samuts āha’: 
guṇagaṇavimalasarasisujātasya  (the Chinese translation 
in T 187 540b09 is 譬如蓮華出於功德廣大池中 , a bit different 
from the expected gongde ju  功德聚 ); (2) in chapter 15, ‘Abhi-  
niṣkrama ṇa’: hā mama anantakīrte ś atapuṇyasamudgatā 
vimalapuṇyadharā  / hā mama anantavarṇā guṇagaṇaprati -
maṇḍitā ṛṣigaṇaprītikarā  // 130.
23. There are at least two instances in the Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra  
where saṃbhāra  is translated as gongde ju  功德聚 . Chapter 
36, ‘Pramuditanayanajagadvirocan ā’, verse 92: tataḥ 
saṃbhūtaḥ praṇidhimeghaḥ sarvajagatsukhapravaṇagar -
bhaḥ  / saṃbhārasaṃbhava anantā mārgasamudranayā- 
nugata ś ca // 92; chapter 42, ‘Sutejoma ṇḍalaratiśrī’, lines While there is no direct proof that the Java -
nese team that was responsible for the design of 
Borobudur took the meaning of guṇagaṇa and 
saṃbhāra in the same way the Chinese translation 
team did, there is circumstantial evidence indicat-
ing that both communities of Buddhist intellec -
tuals were inspired by the same conceptual world 
based on such sources as the Lalitavistara and the 
Gaṇḍavyūha, and possibly others as well, like the 
Samādhirājasūtra,  and both might have shared 
similar interpretations. Furthermore, we might 
even envisage a direct influence of Prajña,24 who 
translated the Gaṇḍavyūha into Chinese. We also 
know that the Javanese were aware of the notion of 
an assembly of merits and knowledge. In addition 
to the sūtras that are depicted at Borobudur, the 
Kayumvuṅan inscription includes the concept of 
saṃbhāra in verse 3. Moreover, the word Bhūmi-  
saṃbhāra—attested in the Tri Tәpusan inscription 
dated to 842 CE—was associated by de Casparis 
(1950: 167) with Borobudur, though many scholars 
vehemently rejected the idea due to its speculative 
character. However, the Caityavibhaṅgavinayod -
dhṛtasūtra attributed to Śāntigarbha states that 
a stūpa is called ‘the accumulation’ (bsags pa) 
because it represents the essences to be accumu-
lated (Dorjee 1996: 117, 121). Also, if we take into 
account the way the compound bhūmisaṃbhāra  
is used in the Gaṇḍavyūha—by which the com -
poser of the Tri Tәpusan inscription might have 
been inspired—, we see that this compound is not 
being used in connection with the word bhūdhara  
but with the grounds of Tathāgata (tathāgata-  
bhūmi, from the longer compound tathāgatabhū-
misaṃbhārajñānāni in chapter 15, Indriyeśvara, 
11–12: etat pramukhair buddhakṣetraparamāṇurajaḥ samair 
bodhicittāṅgasaṃbhārair abhiniṣpannaḥ sa bodhisattvo 
jāto bhavati tathāgatakule .
24. I have demonstrated that Prajña’s version of the 
Bhadracarī  was likely the one depicted at Borobudur 
(Kandahjaya 2004), and consequently the same for the 
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra . Besides, either the Javanese monk Bi -
anhong brought back a copy of Prajña’s Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra , 
or Prajña himself provided a copy while staying in Java. 
Before arriving at Canton in 780, Prajña visited the islands 
of the South Seas: Pachow (1958: 19) says that he ‘traveled 
extensively in the South Seas’, while White (2005: 425) says 
that he spent twenty-two years in the South Seas. Thus, Java 
is not excluded from the possible places where he stayed.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   69 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 78] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya70
of the Gaṇḍavyūha).25 Therefore, if we put aside 
certain details of de Casparis’ argument that cause 
a vulnerable link and instead apply a more compre -
hensive understanding of the concept of saṃbhāra  
as shown above, de Casparis’ intuition, associating 
the name Bhūmisambhāra with Borobudur, may 
be right after all.
In any event, the Sanskrit compound guṇagaṇa  
is especially remarkable. Verse 15 of the Kayum -
vuṅan inscription attests this as a compound 
together with the word Sugata to describe the 
vihāra being consecrated (sugataguṇagaṇa). Via 
the Chinese translations of the Lalitavistara as well 
as the Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra discussed above, we are 
able to recapture the composer’s idea and perceive 
the profound relationship between the name Śrī 
Ghananātha (in verse 11) and the vihāra of multi-
tude of virtues of the Sugata in the Kayumvuṅan 
inscription, or for that matter between this name 
and Borobudur. This relationship becomes even 
more astounding when we realize that among 
the meanings of the Sanskrit word ghana in the 
name Śrī Ghananātha there is that of ‘the cube 
of a number’. This meaning becomes relevant if 
we associate it with the cube of three (33 which is 
equal to 27) represented in Amoghavajra’s grid 
formula for the construction of the Garbhadhā -
tu maṇḍala (Kandahjaya 1995: 28–30, 38–40). In 
view of the above, the link between the meaning of 
ghana and the selection of a grid of 27 × 27 become 
suddenly clearer, and can also be associated with 
the findings, in the Borobudur’s surroundings, of 
clay miniature stūpas with eight smaller stūpas 
attached to the aṇḍa discussed earlier, which lead 
us to recognize the numinous entrenched in the 
kūṭāgāra, tree, or stūpa. In other words, according 
to this principle, there is a metaphysical aspect 
attached to the physical kūṭāgāra, tree, or stūpa. 
In the case of Borobudur, chances are that the ar-
chitects additionally expressed this metaphysical 
aspect by taking 216 grids off the grid of 27 × 27 to 
create the invisible 108 Buddha statues, each for 
the nadir and zenith of Borobudur. In this way, the 
25. The phrase is found in chapter 15, ‘Indriyeśvara’: 
tathāgatabhūmisaṃbhārajñānāni . Chinese translations 
are as follows: T 278 704c09: 此如來地 ; T 279 350c19: 此人
應入一切智地 ; T 293 704b10: 此人應入如來智地 .architects of Borobudur also represented the name 
Śrī Ghananātha mathematically and geometrically 
by entirely applying all the grids created by the 
ghana of three to the assignment of Buddha statues 
at Borobudur (see Table 4.3).
conclusion
The evidence presented in this study allows us 
to marvel at not only the architects’ scheme and 
their conception of Borobudur as a stūpa-prāsāda , 
but also at the origin of the name ‘Borobudur’, 
namely, ‘an excellent Buddha image’ ( varabud -
dharūpa ). As such, we may interpret the structure 
and symbolism of the entire structure—precisely 
as prescribed in the texts—as a representation of 
the Buddha, including examples of his conduct 
(buddhacarita ) as well as symbols of his teachings 
to attain supreme and full enlightenment. All this 
is for one to revere, internalize, and acquire.
Primary Sources
Apadāna Commentary: see Apadāna-Aṭṭhakathā.Avadāna-kalpalatā: see Vaidya 1959.
Divyāvadāna: see Vaidya 1999.
Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra: see Vaidya 1960.
Lalitavistara: see Vaidya 1958.
Mahāvairocanābhisambodhisūtra: see Giebel 2005; 
Hodge 2003.Samādhirājasūtra: see Vaidya 1961.
Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan (Mantranaya and  
Advayasādhana ): see Kats 1910.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2018a. ‘Maritime Buddhism’, Oxford 
Research Encyclopaedia of Religion. [Last ac-  
cessed March 2022 at: https://oxfordre.com  
/religion/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.  
001.0001/acrefore-9780199340378-e-638]
. 2018b. ‘The Place of Nusantara in the 
Sanskritic Buddhist Cosmopolis’, TRaNS: 
Trans-Regional and -National Studies of 
Southeast Asia  6/2: 139–166.
Afshar, Qobad. 1981. An Ancient Indian Itinerary: 
The Geographical Appellatives in the Gaṇḍavyū-
hasūtra; Tentative Identifications. Lausanne: 
Kronasia.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   70 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 79] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur71
Apadāna-Aṭṭhakathā. 1998. Dhammagiri-Pāli-
Ganthamālā-64. Dhammagiri, Igatpuri: 
Vipassana Research Institute.
Bénisti, Mireille. 1960. ‘Étude sur le stûpa dans 
l’Inde ancienne’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 50/1: 37–116.
Bernet Kempers, August J. 1976. Ageless Borobudur: 
Buddhist Mystery in Stone, Decay and Restora-
tion, Mendut and Pawon, Folklife in Ancient 
Java. Wassenaar: Servire.
. 1981. ‘The Reliefs and the Buddhist Texts’, 
in Proceedings of the International Symposium 
on Chandi Borobudur, pp. 92–105. Tokyo: 
Executive Committee for the International 
Symposium on Chandi Borobudur.
Black, Deborah. 1997. Leaves of the Heaven Tree. 
Berkeley: Dharma Publishing.
Boechari. 1982. ‘Preliminary Report on Some 
Archaeological Finds around the Borobudur 
Temple’, in Seri CC No. 5: Reports and Doc -
uments of the Consultative Committee for the 
Safeguarding of Borobudur, 5th Meeting, April 
1976. Borobudur: Proyek Pelita Pemugaran 
Candi Borobudur, Departemen Pendidikan 
dan Kebudayaan.
Boechari, Wiwin Djuwita and H. Ongkodharma. 
1982. ‘Report on Clay Votive Stūpas from the 
Borobudur Site’, in Seri CC No. 8: Reports and 
Documents of the Consultative Committee for 
the Safeguarding of Borobudur, 8th Meeting, 
April 1979. Borobudur: Proyek Pelita Pemuga-
ran Candi Borobudur, Departemen Pendidikan 
dan Kebudayaan.
de Casparis, Johannes G. 1950. Prasasti Indonesia 
I: Inscripties uit de Çailendra-tijd. Bandung: 
A.C. Nix & Co.
Chihara, Daigoro. 1981. ‘The Symbolic Meaning 
of Chandi Borobudur’, in Proceedings of the 
International Symposium on Chandi Borobu -
dur, pp. 136–144. Tokyo: Executive Committee 
for the International Symposium on Chandi 
Borobudur.
. 1996. Hindu-Buddhist Architecture in 
Southeast Asia. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Dās, Bhūṣaṇa Çandra. 1897. ‘Story of Prātihāryya’, 
Journal of the Buddhist Text and Anthropolog-
ical Society 5/3: 17–20.Der Kinderen, T.H. 1886a. ‘Bestuursvergadering 
van Dinsdag, 3 November 1885’, Notulen van 
de Algemeene en Directie-vergaderingen van 
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen 23: 145–161.
. 1886b. ‘Bestuursvergadering van Dinsdag, 
2 Februari 1886’, Notulen van de Algemeene en 
Directie-vergaderingen van het Bataviaasch 
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 
24: 13–36.
. 1886c. ‘Bestuursvergadering van Dinsdag 
5 October 1886’, Notulen van de Algemeene en 
Directie-vergaderingen van het Bataviaasch 
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen  
24: 149–166.
Dorjee, Pema. 1996. Stūpa and Its Technology: A 
Tibeto-Buddhist Perspective. New Delhi: Indira 
Gandhi National Centre for the Arts/Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Dumarçay, Jacques. 1985. Borobudur. Singapore: 
Oxford University Press.
Edgerton, Franklin. 1970. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit 
Dictionary. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Executive Committee for the International 
Symposium on Chandi Borobudur. 1981. 
Proceedings of the International Symposium 
on Chandi Borobudur. Tokyo: Executive 
Committee for the International Symposium 
on Chandi Borobudur. 
Fontein, Jan. 1989. The Law of Cause and Effect 
in Ancient Java. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
. 2012. Entering the Dharmadhātu: A study 
of the Gaṇḍavyūha reliefs of Borobudur . Leiden/
Boston: Brill.
Giebel, Rolf W. 2005. The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi 
Sutra. Berkeley: Numata Center.
Gifford, Julie. 2011. Buddhist practice and visual 
culture: The visual rhetoric of Borobudur. 
London: Routledge.
Gomez, Oscar and Hiram W. Woodward Jr. 1981. 
Barabudur: History and Significance of a 
Buddhist Monument. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. ‘The “Greatly Ferocious” 
Spell (Mahāraudra-nāma-hṛdaya): A dhāraṇī  
Inscribed on a Lead-Bronze Foil Unearthed near 
Borobudur’, in Kurt Tropper (ed.), Epigraphic 
Evidence in the Pre-Modern Buddhist World: 
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   71 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 80] ---
Hudaya Kandahjaya72
Proceedings of the Eponymous Conference  
Held in Vienna, pp. 1–36. Vienna: Arbeitskreis 
für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien.
Groeneveldt, W.P. 1891. ‘Bestuursvergadering 
van Dinsdag 7 October 1890’, Notulen van 
de Algemeene en Directie-vergaderingen van 
het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen 28: 99– 112.
Hariani Santiko. 1975. ‘Some Remarks on Votive 
Stupas and Votive Tablets from Borobudur’, 
Majalah Arkeologi 1/1: 68– 76.
Hirakawa, Akira. 1997. Buddhist Chinese-Sanskrit 
Dictionary. Tokyo: The Reiyukai.
Hodge, Stephen. 2003. The Maha-Vairocana-
Abhisambodhi Tantra, with Buddhaguhya’s 
Commentary. New York//London: Routledge 
Curzon.
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. 1995. The Master Key for 
Reading Borobudur Symbolism. Bandung: 
Yayasan Penerbit Karaniya.
. 1998. Borobudur: A Case Study of 
Indonesian Responses to Sea-route Buddhist 
Transmission. MA thesis, Graduate Theological 
Union, Berkeley.
. 2004. A Study on the Origin and Signifi -
cance of Borobudur. PhD dissertation,  
Graduate Theological Union, Berkeley.
. 2009. ‘The Lord of All Virtues’, Pacific 
World: Journal of the Institute of Buddhist 
Studies, Third Series 11: 1– 24.
. 2016. ‘Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, 
Borobudur, and the Origins of Esoteric 
Buddhism in Indonesia’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), 
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 67– 112. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Ijzerman, J.W. 1886. ‘Iets over den oorspron -
kelijken voot van Boro Boedoer’, Tijdschrift  
voor Indische Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde  
31: 261– 268.
Kats, Jacob. 1910. Sang hyang Kamahâyânikan: 
Oud-Javaansche tekst, met inleiding, vertaling 
en aanteeekeningen. ’s-Gravenhage: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 
Klimburg-Salter, Deborah E. 1998. Tabo: A Lamp for 
the Kingdom. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Krom, Nicolaas J. 1927. Barabuḍur. Archaeological 
Description. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.Krom, Nicolaas J. and Theodoor van Erp. 1920–
1931. Beschrijving van Barabuḍur. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff.
Lévi, Sylvain. 1931. ‘The Karmavibhaṅga illustrated 
in the Sculptures of the Buried Basement of 
the Barabuḍur’, Annual Bibliography of Indian 
Archaeology for the Year 1929, pp. 1 –17. Leiden: 
E.J. Brill.
. 1932. Mahā-Karmavibhaṅga ( La grande 
classification des actes) et Karmavibhaṅgopa -
deśa ( Discussion sur le Mahā Karmavibhaṅga). 
Paris: Librairie Ernest Leroux.
. 1933. Sanskrit Texts from Bāli. Baroda: 
Oriental Institute. 
Li, Rongxi. 2000. Buddhist Monastic Traditions 
of Southern Asia . Berkeley: Numata Center for 
Buddhist Translation and Research.
Li, Yunpeng ( 李雲鵬 ). n.d. Pictorial Displays 
of the 53 Visits of Sudhana, and Śākyamuni  
(Shancaitongzi wushisan can shijiashizun 
yinghua shiji tu 善財童子五十三參釋迦世尊
應化示蹟圖 ). N.p.
Lokesh Chandra. 1975. Sudhana’ s Way to Enlight-
enment. New Delhi: Sharada Rani.
Maurer, Petra H. 2005. ‘Architekturwissenschaft-
liches im Vaidurya dkar po’, Zentralasiatische 
Studien 34: 179–196.
Miksic, John N. 1999. The Mysteries of Borobudur. 
Hong Kong: Periplus. 
Monier-Williams, Monier. 2005. Sanskrit–English 
Dictionary . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. [Reprint; 
1st edition Clarendon Press, 1899]
Pachow, W. 1958. ‘The Voyage of Buddhist Mis -
sions to South-East Asia and the Far East’, 
Journal of the Greater India Society 17: 1–22.
Pott, J.G. 1909. ‘Notulen van de eerste Direc -
tievergadering gehouden op Maandag, 11 
Januari 1909’, Notulen van de Algemeene en 
Directie-vergaderingen van het Bataviaasch 
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 
47: 1–15.
Rhi, Ju-hyung. 1991. Gandhāran Images of 
the “Śrāvastī Miracle”: An Iconographic Re-
assessment. PhD dissertation, University of 
California, Berkeley.
Robson, Stuart. 1995. Deśawarṇana (Nāgar -
akṛtāgama) by Mpu Prapañca. Leiden: KITLV  
Press.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   72 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 81] ---
The Scheme of Borobudur73
Roth, Gustav. 1980. ‘Symbolism of the Buddhist 
Stūpa’, in Anna L. Dallapiccola and Stephanie 
Zingel-Avé Lallemant, The Stūpa: Its Religious, 
Historical and Architectural Significance,  
pp. 182–209. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Satyawati Suleiman. 1983. ‘Chandi Borobudur: 
Historical and Cultural Background’, Mitra 
Budaya Journal 1.
Sharma, Parmananda. 1990. Śāntideva’s 
Bodhicharyāvatāra. Vols. 1 and 2. New Delhi: 
Aditya Prakashan.
Sinclair, Iain. 2016. ‘Coronation and Liberation 
According to a Javanese Monk in China: 
Bianhong’s Manual on the abhiṣeka of a 
cakravartin’, in Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric 
Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 29–66. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Skilling, Peter. 2004. ‘Random Jottings on 
Śrīghana: An Epithet of the Buddha’, Annual 
Report of the International Research Institute  
for Advanced Buddhology at Soka University 
for the Academic Year 2003, ARIRIAB VII,  
pp. 147–158. Tokyo: The International Re-
search Institute for Advanced Buddhology, 
Soka University.  
Skorupski, Tadeusz. 2002. Kriyāsaṃgraha: Com -
pendium of Buddhist Rituals, An Abridged 
Version. Tring, UK: The Institute of Buddhist 
Studies.
Slametmulyana. 1979. Nagarakretagama dan Tafsir 
Sejarahnya. Jakarta: Bhratara Karya Aksara.
Snodgrass, Adrian. 1988. The Matrix and Diamond 
World Mandalas in Shingon Buddhism. New 
Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Soothill, William E. and Lewis Hodous. 1977. A 
Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass. [Reprint; 1st edition Kegan 
Paul, 1937]
Steinkellner, Ernst. 1995. Sudhana’s Miraculous 
Journey in the Temple of Ta Pho. Roma: Istituto 
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Stutterheim, Willem F. 1956. ‘Chaṇḍi Barabuḍur: 
Name, Form & Meaning’, in F.D.K. Bosch,  Studies in Indonesian Archaelogy, pp. 3–90. 
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Sundberg, Jeffrey R. and Rolf W. Giebel. 2011. ‘The 
Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi as 
Chronicled by Lü Xiang ( 呂向 ): South Indian 
and Śrī Laṅkān Antecedents to the Arrival of 
the Buddhist Vajrayāna in Eighth-Century 
Java and China’, Pacific World: Journal of the 
Institute of Buddhist Studies,  Third Series 13: 
129–222. 
Susumu, Ōtake. 2007. ‘On the Origin and Early 
Development of the Buddhāvataṃsaka-sūtra’, 
in Imre Hamar (ed.), Reflecting Mirrors: Per -
spectives on Huayan Buddhism, pp. 87–108. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1988. Stupa: Art, Architectonics 
and Symbolism. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
UNESCO. 2005. The Restoration of Borobudur. 
Paris: UNESCO.
Vaidya, P.L. 1958. Lalita-Vistara. Darbhanga: 
Mithila Institute.
. 1959. Avadāna-kalpalatā. 2 vols. Darbhan -
ga: Mithila Institute.
. 1960. Gaṇḍavyūha Sūtram. Darbhanga: 
Mithila Institute.
. 1961. Samādhirājasūtra. Darbhanga: 
Mithila Institute.
. 1999. Divyāvadānam. Darbhanga: Mithila 
Institute.
Voûte, Caesar and Mark Long. 2008. Borobudur: 
Pyramid of the cosmic Buddha. New Delhi: D.K. 
Printworld.
White, Kenneth R. 2005. The Role of Bodhicitta  
in Buddhist Enlightenment Including a 
Translation into English of Bodhicitta-śāstra, 
Benkemmitsu-nikyōron, and Sammaya-kaijo. 
New York: The Edwin Mellen Press.
Wogihara, Unrai. 1979. Sanskrit-Chinese-Japanese 
Dictionary. Tokyo: Suzuki Research Founda -
tion.
Woodward, Hiram W. Jr. 2009. ‘Bianhong, Mas-
termind of Borobudur’, Pacific World: Journal 
of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, Third Series 
11: 25–60.
04_CreSouthV2_5P_29Jul22.indd   73 29/7/22   3:11 PM

--- [Page 82] ---
Chapter 5
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko: Its Possible Function  
and Association with the Mediaeval Sri Lankan Monastery  
at Anurādhapura
Saran Suebsantiwongse
introduction
Measuring 26 by 26 metres and situated on the 
northwestern side of the Ratu Boko complex, a 
square, two-terraced platform with a deep hole at 
the centre can be found just steps away from the 
entrance to the second enclosure. The structure 
is known locally as Candi Pembakaran, which 
literally means ‘Temple of Ash’ due to the fact that 
it was believed to be a crematorium or a sacrificial 
fire pit as ashes were said to have been found on 
the structure. However, its actual purpose remains 
unclear. 
The fragment of an inscription unearthed near 
the entrance to the second enclosure reveals that 
the complex was modelled after the Abhayagirivi-  
hāra in Anurādhapura, Sri Lanka. The renowned 
Dutch epigraphist Johannes G. de Casparis (1961: 
245) observed that it is ‘either a more or less exact 
replica of the Ceylonese monastery or, more proba -
bly, a building which had enough in common with 
it—in form or spirit or both—to deserve the same 
name.’ If the inscription and de Casparis’ obser -
vations are indeed reliable, a square pit or similar 
structure must also have existed in Anurādhapura. 
Faxian, a travelling Buddhist monk who lived in the 
5th century CE, talks about a square Bodhi shrine at 
Abhayagirivihāra in his chronicle. In the light of the 
brief description of the Abhayagirivihāra’s shrine 
given by the monk and of its location near a water 
source, one may surmise that the square structure 
at Ratu Boko might have had the same function, 
given that the Bodhi shrine is one part of a three-
fold Buddhist monastery consisting of a stūpa, a 
pratimāghara (temple for a Buddha image), and a bodhighara (outdoor shrine for the Bodhi tree). On 
the other hand, this structure could simply have 
been a part of a stūpa and the large square pit at 
the centre would then have been the dhātugarbha  
(relic chamber). Through the survey of inscrip -
tions, chronicles, archaeological data as well as 
the comparison of the structure with a variety of 
existing monuments, this chapter aims to identify 
the function of Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko. 
The result suggests that the Candi may have had a 
function different from what archaeologists have 
imagined thus far. Given that a Bodhi shrine has 
not yet been identified at Ratu Boko and that the 
structure in question possesses the properties of 
a bodhighara, it might be reasonable to assume—
until more evidence is unearthed—that Candi 
Pembakaran was used as a shrine for the sacred 
Bodhi tree, which symbolizes the enlightenment 
of Lord Buddha.
historical background
Situated on an elevated plateau just south of Mount 
Merapi in Central Java, the Ratu Boko complex, 
according to the ‘Ratubaka’ (or ‘Abhayagiri’) in -
scription in Siddhamātṛkā script found at the site, 
was built in Śaka 714 (or 792–793 CE) (de Casparis 
1961: 242). However, by compiling further infor -
mation from several other inscriptions in the area, 
Degroot (2006: 72) suggests that it was probably 
built in six different phases between the 8th and 
9th centuries CE. 
The complex consists of three compounds: 
western, eastern, and southeastern. The western 
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   74 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 83] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko75
compound comprises three terraces, each consist-
ing of a number of courtyards. The gopura with 
three doorways stands on the second terrace. Candi 
Pembakaran (Fig. 5.1), a two-tiered platform with 
a square pit, is located on the third terrace along 
with a few other remains, such as large pools (one 
situated directly to the east of the Candi), two stone 
platforms, and a covered terrace (pendopo). The 
eastern compound is slightly elevated and contains 
two man-made caves, while the southeastern com -
pound, which is the largest of the three, contains 
several remains of courtyards, covered terraces, 
and water tanks. 
Many opinions on the function of the complex 
have been voiced by explorers and archaeologists 
since the 19th century. The earliest reports were 
those of Dutch scholars, namely Brumund (1854: 
47), Groenveldt (1886: 80), and Ijzerman (1891: 111), 
who referred to, and accepted, local legends that 
suggested the site had been the palace of former 
kings. Among these was the legendary King Boko, 
who was popularly believed to have been a flesh-eat -
ing ogre. The second group of Dutch visitors, which 
included Brandes (1903: 65) and Bosch (1918: 37), 
saw the complex as a cave-monastery with auxiliary 
compounds intended for various usages. Subse -
quent scholars, in particular Stutterheim (1926: 
134–135), strongly argued that the complex was 
not a palace as the covered terraces are too small 
for a typical Javanese palace, and that the plateau 
may have lacked the water supply to effectively run 
a palace. Finally, de Casparis (1956: 267), on the 
basis of his tentative reading of a damaged section 
of the Śivagṛha inscription of 856 CE, suggested 
that the site was a fortress and that a battle had 
been fought there between a Hindu and a Buddhist 
prince, Kumbhayoni and Bālaputradeva, the latter 
belonging to the Śailendra dynasty. 
A number of inscriptions written in Sanskrit 
have been found at the site; one of the most  
significant ones—the Ratubaka or Abhayagiri in-
scription—was unearthed in 1954 in the northern 
part of the complex. A relevant verse reads: ‘This 
Abhayagiri Vihāra here of the Sinhalese ascetics 
(?), trained in the sayings of discipline of the Best 
of the Jinas, was established’.1 Hence, from then 
1. ayam iha jinasūnoḥ padmapāṇeḥ kṛpāloḥ | prahita …… 
pādaiḥ | jinavaravinayoktaiḥ śikṣitānāṃ … tīnām | abha -on, the Ratu Boko has generally been believed  
to have been a Buddhist monastery modelled  
after the Abhayagirivihāra in Anurādhapura, Sri 
Lanka. 
Beside the fragment of inscription found in 1954, 
another notable fragment, which has been dated to 
between 792 and 793 CE, states that the Ratu Boko 
complex was built by King Dharmmottuṅgade -
va, who named it after the Abhayagirivihāra in 
Sri Lanka. Other inscriptions also revealed that 
Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna Buddhism thrived in 
the complex. One solid example is the gold foil 
inscribed with the tantric mantra om ṭakī hūṃ jaḥ 
svāhā. Sundberg (2003: 166–167) noted that this 
could be a mantra associated with Trailokyavi -
jaya from the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha, or a 
similar figure (such as Ṭakkirāja) from the Yoga-
tantric corpus. Similarly, a lead dhāraṇī found not 
so far away from Borobudur, is inscribed with two 
texts comprising of invocations to the Triple Jewel 
and Caṇḍavajrapāṇi2 as Mahāyakṣasenāpati in the 
form of a long mālāmantra (garland of mantra) 
known as Mahāraudranāmahṛdaya (Griffiths 
2014: 28). Griffiths observes that the two mantras 
were probably composed separately as the former 
is written in Hybrid Buddhist Sanskrit while the 
latter uses standard Sanskrit (ibid.: 28). Moreover, 
the mālāmantra contains some of the same bījas 
(seed syllable) as the mantra inscribed on the gold 
foil from Ratu Boko,3 thus suggesting that both 
mantras belong to Trailokyavijaya (ṭakī hūṃ jāḥ 
are the bījākṣaras of the deity) and that the foils 
may have been used as protective amulets of the 
site. Acri (2016: 347) agrees with this and elaborates 
on Sundberg’s (2003) and Jordaan’s and Colless’ 
(2004) theories that the yantra demonstrates ele-
ments of anti-Śaiva polemic; this corresponds to 
the socio-religious and socio-political backdrop 
of 9th-century Central Java when the region saw 
a shift from Buddhism to Śaiva dominance. 
yagirivihāraḥ kāritaḥ siṅhalānām || English translation by 
de Casparis (1961: 245).
2. The figure was referred to as Trailokyavijaya in later 
Buddhist iconographical sources in Sanskrit. See Griffiths 
2014: 31.
3. ṭaki hūṃ jaḥ hūṃ kiṭa hūṃ ṭaki dhuṃ kiṭa dhuṃ iya 
ija… See Griffiths 2014: 28.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   75 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 84] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse76
The evidence of the presence of the Mahāyā -
na and Vajrayāna schools at Ratu Boko, which 
was associated with the Abhayagirivihāra, affirms 
the historical understanding that the Sri Lankan 
monastery had earlier been a centre of Sanskritic 
Buddhist thought before it became an exclusive 
centre of Pali Buddhism at a later time.4 None -
theless, if the complex was indeed modelled after 
the Abhayagiri monastery, it comes as a surprise that it does not comprise the famous mahāstūpa  
surrounded by covered hallways that its Sri Lankan 
counterpart has as a main structure.
Degroot (2006: 72) is of the opinion that the 
Abhayagiri inscription, which identified the Ratu 
Boko complex as the second Abhayagirivihāra, 
is contemporaneous with the third phase of the 
complex’s development, which she believes saw the 
construction of structures with Sri Lankan features. 
She identifies a pendopo complex at Ratu Boko, 
which is located on ‘high, isolated site with rocky 
outcrops’ and comprises rock caves, pools and a 
double-platform building, typical features of a Sri 
Lankan meditation monastery (ibid.: 61). Similar-
ly, Sundberg (2016: 349) points out that the dou-
ble-platform, which forms the centrepiece of Ratu 
Boko, is representative of signature Sinhalese archi -
tecture. Tellingly, the same type of structures exists 
in high concentration in Anurādhapura where they 
were built for Sri Lankan ascetics known as the 
paṃsukūlikas (ibid.: 355). Furthermore, Wijesuriya 
(1998: 32–34) pointed out that most monasteries in 
Sri Lanka are also located on mountains and slopes 
and were often built on sites with pre-existing caves, 
which could be both natural and man-made caves 
depending on the terrain. This was to make sure 
that the monks had an atmosphere conducive to 
meditation, yet were not too far away from a hab-
itation where they could receive alms. 
However, some of the distinctive buildings 
of a Sri Lankan monastery have not yet been 
identified. There have been many speculations 
on the functions of different ruins at Ratu Boko, 
many of which are being investigated but still 
4. Specifically, after the reforms imposed by the Rajarattha 
kings from Sena II (r. 866–901 CE) onward, to bring the 
Abhayagiri into orthodox compliance with the Pāli-based 
Śrāvakayāna doctrines conserved in the rival Mahāvihāra. 
See Sundberg 2016: 361.remain inconclusive. Candi Pembakaran falls 
into this category; there are several opinions on 
what might have been its function. Some scholars 
believe it was used as a homakuṇḍa (sacrificial fire 
pit), which, according to Miksic (2015: 57), may 
have fulfilled the same purpose as Candi Pawon, 
as pawon means ‘kitchen’ (from awu, ‘ash’). Yet 
another opinion suggests a crematorium where the 
remains of members of the nobility were inciner-
ated: this was based on the archaeological report 
that a considerable amount of ash was found in the pit when the site was first explored by Dutch 
archaeologists in the 1930s (Miksic 2015: 57). In 
fact, Miksic refers to Candi Pembakaran as the 
‘Burning Temple’. I argue, however, that neither 
the homakuṇḍa nor the funeral pyre is a typical 
part of a Sri Lankan monastery nor are either 
mentioned in literary sources on the Abhayagiri monastery and Sri Lankan Buddhist architecture 
(such as the Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyāśāstra) . Addition -
ally, Candi Pembakaran’s pit seems to be too big 
both for cremation and homa; a structure as big 
as this would have required a massive amount of 
firewood and ghee (clarified butter) to keep the 
fire burning, which I imagine would have been 
unrealistic for a monastic community living on 
top of a mountain. Given that Candi Pembakaran 
is located near a man-made pond and shaped like a 
square Bodhi shrine, I suggest it may have indeed 
been a bodhighara, which is undoubtedly one of 
the three most important buildings in the Abha-  
yagirivihāra as attested in various writings.
components of mediaeval  
sri lankan monasteries 
The presence of epigraphic evidence linking Ratu 
Boko to Abhayagirivihāra, as well as some architec -
tural and iconographic elements common to those 
two sites, has led scholars to regard the former as a 
Javanese ‘replica’ of the latter. In order to substan -
tiate this claim, it is of paramount importance to 
identify the components of the classical Buddhist 
monasteries in Sri Lanka through archaeological 
evidence and literary sources in an effort to match 
them with the ruins at the Javanese complex.
Typically, a Sri Lankan monastery comprises 
meditative walk platforms, hot-water baths, la -
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   76 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 85] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko77
Fig. 5.1: The ‘Candi Pembakaran’. (Photo: Achmad Muttohar)
trines, lavatories, refectories, store houses, chapter 
houses, and ponds. This list finds a textual attesta-
tion in the Mahāvaṃsa, a 5th-century Pali history 
of Buddhism on the island, which refers to two 
types of monastic settlements along with their 
structures. The first is a cave settlement similar to 
the monastery at Mihintaḷe, located on a remote 
rocky outcrop and the second is the more urban-
ized monastery at Tissārāma, which later developed 
into a Mahāvihāra (Wijesuriya 1998: 119–120).
The vinayas (rules) of the Cullavagga, a Pali text 
on monks’ etiquette, additionally dictate that early 
forms of the dwelling places for the monks were 
either caves or temporary shelters. In fact, accord-
ing to the text, Anāthapiṇḍika (or Anāthapiṇḍada 
in Sanskrit), a wealthy disciple of the Buddha, is 
said to have built such a dwelling place for his 
guru at the Jetavana forest consisting of various structures, namely cells, porches, attendance halls, 
fire halls, huts, privies, walking paths, bathrooms, 
lotus ponds  (Wijesuriya 1998: 122). Similarly, the 
Mahāvagga, another Pali text, which recounts the 
events in the life of the Buddha after the Enlight-
enment, gives an almost identical list of buildings,5 
apart from additions, namely the curved house, 
long house, mansion, and cave.
After Buddhism had started to receive signifi-
cant royal patronage and Buddhist complexes had 
started to become more expansive, it seems that, 
reflecting this shift, three large structures, namely 
the cetiya ( stūpa), the bodhighara (Bodhi shrine), 
5. Namely, curved house, long house, mansions, caves, 
cells, porch, attendance halls, fire halls, huts, privies, walking 
paths, wells, halls at the wells, bathrooms, halls in the bath-
rooms, lotus ponds, sheds. See Wijesuriya 1998: 122.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   77 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 86] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse78
and the pratimāghara (image house), which are not 
originally mentioned in the early Pali texts, took 
precedence over other structures mentioned in 
the aforesaid texts. First, the cetiya  (stūpa) became 
the only compulsory structure starting from the 
5th century CE onwards, the bodhighara and the 
pratimāghara achieved the same status soon after; 
and the trio then became permanent fixtures to 
the monastery complexes in Sri Lanka (Wijesuriya 
1998: 125). 
The Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyāśāstra, a Sanskrit 
treatise written in Siṅhala script dealing with 
Sri Lankan Buddhist architecture and iconogra -
phy, preserved in a palm-leaf manuscript from 
Gampola in Sri Lanka, lists five structures known 
as pañcāvāsa (pabbata in Pali), namely bimbālaya  
(pratimāghara), prāsāda (mansion-type building), 
bodhighara (Bodhi shrine), cetiya (stūpa), and 
sabhā (assembly hall) as the most important struc -
tures (Jayasuriya, Prematilleke, and Silva 1995: 12). 
It further prescribes them to be placed on particu -
lar spots in the planimetry of the complex, which 
is in the form of zonal grids known as pīṭha (9 
squares) and upapīṭha (25 squares), where each 
square of the grids is linked to a deity. The pīṭha  
and upapīṭha are further classified into different 
types. The pīṭha comprises one classification: the 
Siṅhārāma with two sub-types, categorized by the 
direction that the gopura is facing: west and east. 
Both Siṅhārāma sub-types have the pratimāghara  
at the centre with other pañcāvāsa structures sur-
rounding it. The upapīṭha classifications include 
Hastyārāma (three sub-types) and Gokulārāma  
(one sub-type). The sub-types are again classified 
according to the direction the gopura (gateway) 
faces. All Hastyārāma sub-types appear to have 
the sabhā (congregation) at the centre with other 
pañcāvāsa buildings surrounding it in various 
arrangements. The Gokulārāma also has a sabhā  
at the centre, but the pañcāvāsa structures are 
aligned to the north of the sabhā. According to 
Jayasuriya, Prematilleke, and Silva (1995), ancient 
Sri Lankan monasteries have only been found to 
follow the Hastyārāma and Gokulārāma classifi-
cations, but the editors do not believe that other 
types do not exist; they feel that the text has to be 
compared further with material remains (ibid.: 
215). It is also possible that the monks or patrons at that time may have preferred these two to the 
other types. 
Having demonstrated that Sri Lankan mon -
asteries were constructed with references from 
textual sources and owing to Ratu Boko’s connec-
tion with Sri Lanka, there is a possibility, therefore, 
that the builders of the Javanese monastery could 
also have used texts as sources for its construction, 
although there is no evidence to say what the texts 
were. However, the Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyāśāstra is 
the only extant text providing a comprehensive 
code for Buddhist architecture, in particular the 
monasteries in Sri Lanka (ibid.: 4), but the date 
of the text is still uncertain, though it is unlikely 
that the text predates the construction of the Ratu 
Boko complex.
the origin of the bodhimaṇḍa  
(bodhi shrine)
The Buddha, having meditated under the Śrī 
Mahābodhi tree (ficus religiosa) at Bodhgayā, 
attained enlightenment; as this moment is the 
climax of Buddha’s life and the epitome of Bud -
dhist teaching, many texts about the life of the 
Buddha tend to describe the event in great detail. 
Hence, the Bodhi tree has been associated with 
the Buddha and Buddhist teachings ever since. As 
a matter of fact, Cunningham (1879: 14) points 
out that the throne on which the Buddha attained 
enlightenment is referred to as the bodhimaṇḍa  
(‘house of [a tree] of enlightenment’) as well as the 
vajrāsana (‘diamond throne’).  Nevertheless, the 
worship of the Bodhi tree, or in fact any species 
of tree, predates Buddhism. It had been the object 
of worship since the Indus Valley Civilization, as-
sociated with the cult of the Mother Goddess of 
fertility (Fergusson 1971: 56–57). An amulet found at 
Mohenjodaro shows a platform built around a large 
tree.6 The same concept evidently found its way 
into early Buddhism, as sculptures of yakṣiṇīs or 
śālabhañjikas standing against or kicking the trees 
to bring down the ripening fruits, which stand for 
6. As Mackay describes it, ‘there is a large tree with a 
platform round it, exactly like the platforms that are 
frequently built round the sacred trees in India today’. See 
Mackay 1989: 361–362.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   78 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 87] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko79
fertility, are prominent among the remains of the 
toraṇas (arched gates) belonging to the great stūpas 
of Bhārhut and Sāñcī. Aside from representing 
fertility and prosperity, sculptures of semi-divine 
beings, which are often depicted along with trees 
at Buddhist monuments, reflect early Buddhism’s 
connection with the ancient animistic belief which 
sees trees as the dwelling places of spirits and nāgas 
(semi-divine serpents). The best example can be 
seen in sculptures depicting the scene of the En -
lightenment of the Buddha in which reliefs of the 
serpent-king, Kālika and his wife in the anthropo-
morphic form are shown worshipping the Buddha 
as he sits on the Enlightenment throne,7 which is a 
part of the Bodhi tree (Williams 1975: 179). Another 
popular depiction memorialized in reliefs found 
in many Buddhist monuments across South Asia 
and Southeast Asia is the scene that comes imme-
diately after the Enlightenment, when the Nāga 
Mucalinda coils around the Buddha who is seated 
under the Bodhi tree and shelters him from the 
elements with his large hood, which is often de -
picted with seven heads. This scene takes place on 
the fifth week after the Enlightenment according to 
the Lalitavistara and on the sixth week according 
to the Nidānakathā. Vogel (1926: 103) observes 
that the earliest version of the Mucalinda episode 
found in a Pali canon mentions that the Buddha 
is seated under a tree also called a Mucalinda-tree, 
but which does not appear in later texts, and thus 
he hypothesizes that nāgas were probably con -
ceived as tree-spirits in early Buddhism. Similarly, 
the Dummedha Jātaka refers to a scene in which a 
crowd gathers around a Bodhi tree to pray to the 
goddess who dwells in it,8 but the Mahāvastu refers 
to the observation made by the Buddha, criticizing 
7. Reference to this event can be found in the Lalitavistara, 
Chapter 23.
8. ‘… the prince one day mounted his chariot and drove 
out of the city. On the way he saw a crowd gathered at a 
holy banyan-tree, praying to the fairy who had been reborn 
in that tree, to grant them sons and daughters, honour 
and wealth, each according to his heart’s desire. Alighting 
from his chariot, the Bodhisatta drew near to the tree and 
behaved as a worshipper so far as to make offerings of per-
fumes and flowers, sprinkling the tree with water, pacing 
reverently round its trunk. Then mounting his chariot again, 
he went his way back into the city.’ Chapter 14 (trans. Silva 
1989: 173).the worship of the Bodhi tree by the villagers on 
the banks of the Varaṇā river.9 
Apart from being an indication that early 
Buddhism attempted to assimilate pre-existing 
brahmanical and local customs, Viennot (1954: 3) 
observes that the Buddha’s connection with the tree 
as the throne of Enlightenment, is also symbolic 
of the Buddha’s lineage with its root traceable to 
the Solar Dynasty of kings (Sūryavaṃśa),10 and 
which legitimizes the Buddha’s universal sover -
eignty. This is because the ancient consecration (a-  
bhiṣeka) of monarchs, which is described at length 
in several early Vedic texts such as the Kauṣītaki  
Upaniṣad,  Jaiminīyabrāhmaṇa,  and Aitareyabrāh -
maṇa,  was performed on a wooden seat (pīṭhikā) 
normally made from the Uḍumbara wood (fig 
wood/ficus glomerata)11 (Suebsantiwongse 2021: 
40), and therefore, the Buddha’s Enlightenment is 
synonymous to his consecration as the Cakravartin 
(universal overlord).
Furthermore, the worship of early Buddhism 
was ‘aniconic’ and the tree in works of art was 
the representation of the Buddha and his En -
lightenment. Hence Bodhi trees are often seen on 
bas-reliefs at Bhārhut (Fig. 5.2), Sāñcī (Fig. 5.3), 
and Amarāvatī, which are sometimes depicted 
behind an empty throne that represents the seat 
of the Enlightenment. In fact, Snodgrass (1985: 256) 
points out that the spires of the aforesaid stūpas are 
identified with the tree in whose shade the Buddha 
attained nirvāṇa, while the harmikā, which has the 
form of a wooden fence or a hypaethral pavilion, 
9. ‘The Exalted One was staying in Benares, on the 
banks of the river Varaṇā, teaching devas and men. Now 
on the banks of the river, there was a huge banyan tree 
with wide-spreading roots, a big trunk and thickly growing 
branches and leaves. It was a handsome, lovely tree, looking 
dark like a black cloud. A prayer, which a man chanced to 
make at that banyan tree was answered. Therefore, great 
veneration and honour were paid to the tree …’ (trans. 
Silva 1989: 173).
10. All Buddhist texts that describe the lineage of the 
Buddha unanimously state that he hails from the Solar 
Dynasty of kṣatriya kings known as the Ikṣvāku Dynasty, 
founded by the legendary King Ikṣvāku.
11. According to the Dīghanikāya and the Buddhavaṃsa, 
the Uḍumbara tree was the tree under which the 
Koṇāgamana Buddha attained enlightenment. See Walsh 
1995: 200 and Horner 1975: 88.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   79 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 88] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse80
marks the location of the throne of Enlightenment, 
which is the bodhimaṇḍa. Snodgrass (1985: 257) 
further remarks that the bodhimaṇḍa is symbol -
ically identified with the navel of the world and 
metaphysically with the spot where the Enlighten-
ment took place, which is the apex of the cosmos. 
Thus, the harmikā or the bodhimaṇḍa, which sits 
atop the early stūpas, represents, in Snodgrass’ view, 
the centre of the universe, which sits at the summit 
of the Cosmic Mountain, and the metaphysical 
significance of the bodhimaṇḍa probably remains 
the same even when it is constructed on the ground 
and supporting a real tree.
Beside the Enlightenment scene, the tree still 
continues to play a significant role in several 
subsequent scenes in the life of the Buddha. The 
Kaliṅga Bodhi Jātaka tells us that the seeds of the 
original tree were taken and planted at Jetavana 
on the advice of Ānanda.12 The text emphasizes 
the sacredness of the tree by describing how gods 
and kings venerate it. Finally, according to the 
Mahāpadāna Suttanta, each of the seven Buddhas 
is associated with a Bodhi tree13 and the Assattha 
tree is assigned to Gautama Buddha.
Owing to information gleaned from such texts, 
the cult of Bodhi worship probably took shape not 
long after these texts were written. First at Bodh-
gayā, a bodhimaṇḍa was built by Aśoka around the 
3rd century BCE and is referred to as Saṃbodhi  
12. Ānanda (A): ‘Can a shrine be made, Sir, during your 
life? Buddha (B): No, Ānanda, not a body-shrine; that 
kind is made when a Buddha enters Nirvāṇa. A shrine of 
memorial is improper because the connection depends on 
the imagination only. But the great Bodhi tree used by the 
Buddhas is fit for a shrine, be they alive or be they dead. A: 
Sir, while you are away on pilgrimage, the great monastery 
of Jetavana is unprotected, and the people have no place 
where they can show their reverence. Shall I plant a seed 
of the great Bodhi tree before the gateway of Jetavana? B: 
By all means so do, Ānanda, and that shall be as it were an 
abiding place for me…. Then at the gateway of Jetavana, 
he cleared out a pit for the tree to stand in, and a seat he had made of the seven precious things’ (trans. from Silva 
1989: 147).
13. Vipassi – Pāṭalī ( bignonia suaveolens), Sikhī – Puṇḍarī -
ka (adenenthera pavonia), Vessabhū – Sāla ( shorea robusta), 
Kakusandha – Sirrisa ( acacia sirissa), Koṇāgamana – 
Uḍumbara ( ficus glomerata), Kassapa – Nigrodha ( ficus  
bengalensis), Gautama – Assattha ( ficus religiosa). See Silva 
1989: 148.on the Eighth Rock Edict.14 The manner in which 
the emperor venerated the tree is also recorded in the Aśokāvadāna, or the legend of Aśoka, which 
is a part of the Divyāvadāna, a 2nd-century CE 
Sanskrit anthology comprising tales of the life of 
the Buddha and his devotees. The legend has it 
that the Emperor sent all of his precious jewels 
to the Bodhi tree at Bodhgayā and worshipped 
the tree personally by pouring milk scented with 
sandalwood, saffron and camphor kept in five 
thousand pots made of gold, silver, crystal and 
cat’s eye gemstones.15 The Aśokāvadāna also says 
that the Emperor himself built 84,000 monasteries, 
each of which consisted of a bodhimaṇḍa (Strong 
2014: 109–110) and according to the Mahāvaṃsa, 
the king even dedicated his reign to the Bodhi tree 
(Geiger 1950: 125). Consequentially, the reliefs at 
Bhārhut16 and Sāncī stūpas exhibit scenes of the 
worship at Bodhgayā, although there is no evidence 
of bodhimaṇḍas on the premises of these early 
Indian Buddhist monuments.
The spreading of the cult of Bodhi worship, 
according to Cunningham (1879: 107), was pri -
marily due to the fact that, whereas other types 
of relics may have been restricted to one owner, 
the tree could be multiplied by various methods. 
These methods would include simply transporting 
the seeds or saplings. I would imagine the latter to grow faster and hold more spiritual value for 
the seekers given that leaves, which have been 
the symbol of the Enlightenment since the early 
stages of the religion, can be seen on the branches 
planted in the soil from the Buddha’s place of 
Enlightenment—which is, by any standard, a relic 
in its own right.
14. ‘In the past kings used to go out on pleasure tours 
during which there was hunting and other entertainment. 
But ten years after Beloved-of-the Gods (Devānaṃpiya 
Piyadasi) had been coronated, he went on a tour to Saṃbodhi  
and this instituted Dhamma’ (trans. Dhammika 1993: 5).
15. suvarṇarūpyasphaṭikavaiḍūryamayaiḥ pañcakuṃbha -
sahasrair nānāgandhapūrṇaiḥ kṣīracandanakuṅku -
makarpūravāsitair mahābodhim snapayiṣyāmi | (from 
the kunālāvadānam chapter in the Aśokāvadāna. See  
Mukhopadhyaya 1963: 101).
16. A relief has an inscription over it (bhagavato sakamuni -
no bodho), indicating that the scene depicts the Buddha’s 
Enlightenment at Bodhgayā. See Silva 1989: 159.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   80 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 89] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko81
Fig. 5.3: A relief showing the worship of the Bodhi tree 
on the toraṇa  at Sāñcī. (Source: Wikimedia)
Fig. 5.2: A relief from Bhārhut showing the veneration 
of a bodhighara , located at the place of Awakening of 
the Buddha. (Source: Photodharma.net)
the development of bodhighara   
in sri lanka
Saplings of the tree from Bodhgayā were believed to 
have arrived on the island around the 3rd century 
BCE during the time of Devānaṃpiyatissa, who held the tree in great reverence (Fernando 1967: 
7). Faxian, the Chinese monk-traveller, confirms 
this in his chronicle,17 where Anurādhapura is 
said to be the first place where it was planted. Ac-
cording to the Mahāvaṃsa, upon the arrival of 
the saplings from India, King Devānaṃpiyatissa 
worshipped them with a white parasol and gave 
them royal consecration (Chapter 19). The text 
describes the Bodhi shoots being distributed and 
planted in and around the ancient capital at the 
following places: Jambukola, Tivakka, Thūpārā -
ma, Issarasamaṇārāma (Isurumuṇiya), Vessagiri, 
Peṭhamacetiya, Mihintaḷe, Kājaragāma (Kataraga-
ma) and Caṇḍanagāma. Out of these nine, Issarasa-  
maṇārāna, Mihintaḷe and Kājaragāma still retain 
some traces of the original shrines and the last is 
believed to be the only original tree. Moreover, 
the importance of the Bodhi tree to Sri Lankan 
monastics is again highlighted in the Mahāvaṃsa 
in which a prominent therī (nun) named Saṃgha- 
mittā is said to have erected a building at a nunnery 
to house the mast of the ship that bought the Bodhi 
saplings from India; this building was named Ku-
payaṭṭhiṭhapitaghara (Chapter 19, verses 68–69). 
In fact, according Rahula (1966: 120), the Bodhi 
shrine is the second most important structure in 
all Sri Lankan Buddhist monasteries; the first being 
the stūpas that contain the relics of the Buddha, 
and the branch of the Bodhi tree can only be 
cut if it interferes with the cetiya (stūpa), paṭimā 
(image) or āsanagraha (image/prayer hall) or if 
the removal would contribute to a better health 
of the tree. Basnayake (1986: 77), in summing up 
various descriptions of the bodhimaṇḍa given in 
the Mahāvaṃsa, concludes that a bodhimaṇḍa 
constituted a raised square maḷuva (platform) with 
walls on four sides with and entrances at each of 
the cardinal points; the Bodhi tree stood at the 
centre of the maḷuva, that had no roof and could be 
reached by a flight of steps. The space between the 
maḷuva and the wall formed the pradakṣiṇapatha 
(circumambulation path), which was covered with 
17. ‘A former king of the country had sent to Central India 
and got a slip of the Bodhi tree, which he planted by the side 
of the hall of Buddha, where a tree grew up to the height of 
about 200 cubits. As it bent on one side towards the south-
east, the king, fearing it would fall, proposed it with a post 
eight or nine spans round.’ See Legge 1965 [1886]: 103.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   81 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 90] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse82
a roof. This conception is similar to a bas-relief of a 
bodhimaṇḍa found at Sāñcī, which depicts a raised, 
single-storeyed building, while the Bhārhut one 
shows the same structure with two storeys, both 
having the pradakṣiṇapatha.
The Mahānāman inscription dated around 
586–587 CE, which records the erection of a temple 
(probably a  pratimāghara  or image-shrine) on 
the bodhimaṇḍa  at Bodhgayā by a Sri Lankan 
monk-pilgrim named Mahānāman with the aspira -
tion to attain Buddhahood (Tournier 2014: 29), also 
affirmed the importance of the  bodhimaṇḍa in 
the early Sri Lankan Buddhist belief and practice. 
Mahānāman and other Sinhalese monks' methods 
of devotion to the Śrīmahābodhi tree enclosed 
within the  bodhimaṇḍa  at Bodhgayā  as docu -
mented in the inscription may have been repli -
cated upon their return to Sri Lanka and probably 
influenced the construction and the worship of 
the bodhimaṇḍa on the island in the subsequent 
centuries.
The Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyāśāstra refers to a total 
of twenty types of bodhimaṇda (also called bo -
dhivṛkṣa, bodhisthāna, bodhiveśma, bodhighara  
and rājavṛkṣa in the text) but Silva, who is also 
one of the editors of the Sanskrit translation of the 
text, simplifies and categorizes the bodhimaṇḍa  
into two main types in his own book (Silva 1989, 
as follows:
1. Bodhimālaka or Bomaḷuva—a simple wood, 
brick or stone wall built around the tree.
2. Bodhighara—a compound built over a tree 
to shelter it including a circumambulation path 
around it.
It seems that the term bodhighara is used almost 
exclusively in Sri Lanka; the term bodhimaṇḍa 
seems to be used in the Mahāyāna Prajñāpāramitā  
literature18 and in later Pali texts and can refer to an 
awakening state in which one can attain enlighten-
ment. Hence, in this chapter, the term bodhighara is 
used to refer to a physical structure, which houses a 
Bodhi tree situated in Sri Lanka and presumptively 
also in Java. 
18. A group of approximately forty texts in Sanskrit com-
posed in the Indian subcontinent between BCE 100 and 
600 CE, and which are believed to be the earliest Mahāyāna 
sūtras.Silva groups the development of bodhighara  
into the following three phases:
First phase:  Simple platform built around the 
tree. 
Second phase:  More developed from the first 
phase with the additional va-
jrāsana  and a roof covering it.
Third phase:  Fully developed; fence, circum -
ambulation path surrounding the 
tree and a toraṇa on the north 
side.
There are two shapes of bodhighara s in Sri 
Lanka: square and round. Notable squared bo -
dhighara s are those of Nillakgama, Abhayagirivi -
hāra and Vijayārāma, while the circular ones can 
be found at Toluvila, Mänikdena, and Pulukunavi. 
Since this chapter aims to establish that Candi Pem -
bakaran at Ratu Boko may have been a bodhighara , 
only the square types are discussed here. 
Nillakgama’s bodhighara is square, surrounded 
by a wall and has entrances at the east and west. The 
circumambulation path around the tree is covered, 
leaving the centre part open for sunlight to pen-
etrate and providing space for the tree to grow. 
The squared shrine at Abhayagirivihāra sits on a 
raised platform with stairs for the people to ascend 
and worship the tree. There are four pedestals for 
Buddha images, one in each direction. The central 
shrine for the tree at Vijayārāma is, however, dug 
into the ground and has the characteristics of a 
garbhagṛha (sanctum sanctorum). As at Abhaya-
girivihāra, there are also four pedestals for images 
as well as a covered circumambulation path.
Similar to the appearance on the bas-reliefs from 
Bhārhut and Sāñcī, and even to real life scenes at 
Bodhgayā in the present day, the bodhigharas were 
probably decorated with sunshades, banners, flags 
and parasols, offered food, flowers, and jewellery, 
which were mostly likely placed before the vajrāsan-
a;19 this was either with or without images of the 
Buddha.
Nonetheless, Bandaranayake (1974: 161) states 
that neither of the bodhigharas in Sri Lanka have 
received enough serious attention from archaeolo -
gists. This might have been because the remains of a 
bodhighara structure are more obscured than those 
19. Cunningham (1879: 14) identifies the vajrāsana to be 
the same structure as the bodhimaṇḍa. 
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   82 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 91] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko83
of a stūpa or a pratimāghara (image house). And 
with the exception of the Śrī Mahābodhi Temple 
at Bodhgayā, no example of a bodhighara has been 
identified and the structure has thus been regarded 
as of no particular archaeological substance.
candi pembakaran as a bodhighara
Remains of stūpa s, pratimāghara s, monks’ cells, 
ponds, and even caves are found at Ratu Boko, 
but no trace of a bodhighara  is anywhere to be 
seen. If the complex is indeed the second Abhay -agirivihāra as the inscriptional and archaeological 
evidence seems to show, it should also contain at 
least one bodhighara  to fit the criteria. Judging by 
the stone pit at the centre of Candi Pembakaran, 
I argue that it is possible that the structure was 
built as a bodhighara  after the style found at Ab -
hayagirivihāra, Dambadeni (Fig. 5.4), Isurumuṇi 
(Vessagiri), Nillakgama (Fig. 5.5) and Vijayarāma; 
a raised platform and a pit or a lower garbhagṛha , 
which means the worshippers would have had to 
ascend the platform and worship the tree (which 
is grown in the pit) from above it.
Fig. 5.4: A sketch of the bodhighara  at Dambadeni. (Source: author)
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   83 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 92] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse84
Silva (1989) incidentally describes the bo -
dhigharas at Kalaṇi, Kandu, Pādeṇi, and Budumut -
tava in Sri Lanka as having different sets of berms 
like the terraces of a stūpa. At Kandy, devotees are 
permitted to ascend to worship the vajrāsanas and 
the Buddha images. Moreover, Geiger (1950) refers 
to this berm as the koṭṭhaka, which is the terrace 
built to protect the tree even if it consists merely 
of heaps of stones. 
Coincidentally, an unnamed bodhighara (also 
locally known as an āsanaghara) located near the 
Ratnapāsāda20 at Anurādhapura has almost the 
exact measurements as Candi Pembakaran: 28.25 
20. A chapel (uposatha hall) located in the Abhayagiri-  
vihāra complex first built by Vaṭṭagamaṇi Abhaya (89–77 
BCE) and renovated by Kaniṭṭha Tissa (167–186 CE) and 
Mahinda II (777–797 CE).by 25 metres. The remains of a vajrāsana,  the Bud-
dha’s footprint and a Buddha image 1.75 metres in 
height and the tree pit, which are the hallmarks 
of a bodhighara, are found within this structure. 
Another indication suggesting that Candi 
Pembakaran might have been a bodhighara is the 
water tank right behind it on the eastern side, as 
obviously the tree has to be regularly watered and 
cared for. The act of watering the tree is, in fact, 
the central ritual of the entire cult. Back in Sri 
Lanka, the Mahāvaṃsa says that King Mahānāga 
(r. 573–575 CE) invented a practical way of watering 
a bodhighara at Anurādhapura by constructing an 
irrigation channel linking it with the Tisava tank 
(Silva 1989: 156). The same irrigation channel was 
said to have been renovated by King Sena II in 
the 9th century. 
Additionally, Silva (ibid.: 170), in his attempt at 
identifying different archaeological remains in Sri 
Lanka as bodhigharas, came up with eight criteria 
to verify them:
a.  Bodhi tree court
b.  āsanas facing the four directions with pref-
erably large vajrāsana generally facing the 
east
c.  a clear square or circular circumambulation 
path
d.  pillars to support the roof
e.  an outer screen wall on the periphery of the 
circumambulation path made of stone or 
brick
f.  entrance to the circumambulation path
g.  a drain to take the water away from the inner 
Bodhi tree court to the outside
h.  a service flight of steps for the devotees to 
water the base of the tree. 
Criteria g clearly stipulates that it should have 
‘a drain to take the water away from the inner 
Bodhi tree court to the outside.’ Furthermore, all 
of Silva’s criteria can, in fact, be applied to Candi 
Pembakaran whose characteristics seem to fit the 
criteria c, d, e, f, g, and h  perfectly. Criteria c , d, 
and e talk about a circumambulation path and it 
is likely that such a path also existed at the Candi 
as the remains of the base for the stone pillars or 
timber columns are clearly visible on all sides at the top of the terrace. 
Fig. 5.5: A sketch of bodhighara  at Nillakgama. 
(Source: author)
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   84 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 93] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko85
Criteria f and h  stipulate the entrance and a 
flight of stairs. The Ratu Boko structure apparently 
contains both features; the stairs with ornamented 
railings—featuring so-called ‘Kāla-heads’ at the 
top and what seem to be stylized makara-trunks 
at the bottom—leads to the top of the terrace (Fig. 
5.6), where a toraṇa would have stood opening 
into the covered circumambulation path of the 
shrine. Moreover, Candi Pembakaran’s stone 
pit, too, matches Silva’s description of a similar 
structure: ‘the pit of the tree was often lined with 
heavy masonry and built like a well, probably with 
a view to encourage the roots to travel vertically 
downwards instead of laterally’ (1989: 158). He 
adds that growing the tree in a confined stone 
chamber or a well-like construction would have 
helped to protect the structure from the growth 
of the tree’s roots, which could be detrimental to 
the entire structure. 
Speaking of style, the makaras, which, accord-
ing to the Rājāvaliya, a 17th-century historical 
chronicle of Sri Lanka, have a face of an elephant, 
the feet of a lion, the ears of a pig, the body of a 
Fig. 5.6: Kāla motif on a railing at Candi Pembakaran, Ratu Boko. 
(Photo: Sasadara Manjer Kawuryan)fish and tail, are symbolic of water and prosperity, 
and are seen on important Hindu and Buddhist 
structures in India, Sri Lanka, and throughout 
Southeast Asia, including on the railings and at 
the lower corners of the remaining structure of 
the main entrance at Candi Pembakaran. The 
mystical beast is related to the Bodhi cult, which 
is deeply rooted in the ancient cult of fertility, and 
can also be identified with Mucalinda, the serpent 
who protected the Buddha from the rain after his 
Enlightenment. Although the toraṇa at the top of 
the stairs no longer exists, one can speculate that 
it would have also been a toraṇa with a Kāla and 
makara motif, matching those of the railings. Such 
a motif can also be seen above Sinhalese Buddha 
images from the 8th and 11th century CE—the 
Buddha image at Laṅkatilakavihāra at Kandy (Fig. 
5.7) is a good example. Other motifs on stone rail-
ings at Sri Lankan’s bodhigharas were also found; 
these are lotus motifs carved in intricate detail. 
The lotus, which rises from the mud and blooms 
above the water, is the classic symbol of Buddha’s 
enlightenment.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   85 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 94] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse86
A look at some of the iconography at Borobudur, 
Mendut, and Pawon may be helpful in identifying 
Candi Pembakaran as a bodhighara. Almost every 
relief at these three monuments contains depic -
tions of flora and fauna. Stone panels portraying 
all sorts of sacred trees are countless and those 
with the distinctive Bodhi trees are numerous. The 
Bodhi tree can be identified by its heart-shaped 
leaves and is being bedecked with decorative items 
such as banners, garlands, and parasols. It can be 
characterized in three types:
1)  The actual Bodhi tree of the Buddha’s en -
lightenment—always depicted with the 
iconography of the Buddha himself. At 
Borobudur, the tree of enlightenment can 
be found in the first gallery on panels 93, 94  
(Fig. 5.8), 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 and 100, which 
portray the pre- and post-enlightenment 
scenes that lasted for a period of seven 
days. A bodhighara can actually be identi -fied clearly on panel number 100 (Fig. 5.9), 
which illustrates the Buddha performing the 
caṅkramaṇa (meditative walk) to the tree.
2)  The Bodhi tree shown above with various 
bhikṣus (monastics) and holy figures—on 
panels of the second gallery (Gaṇḍavyūha) 
at Borobudur such as panel 19 (Suratiṣṭa -
ta-bhikṣu21), panel 20 (Megha-dramida), 
panel 22 (Sāradhvaja-bhikṣu—Fig. 5.10), 
panel 22 (Sudarśana-bhikṣu) and panel 103 
(Sudhana).
3)  The kalpataru, one of the five trees of Indra’s 
heaven, said to grant wishes (Klokke 1993: 
127)—often shown with anthropomorphic 
animals such as kinnaras and apsarases and 
decorated with gems, garlands, and golden 
pots at its base, as on panel 371, first gallery, 
balustrade at Borobudur (Fig. 5.11) and a 
21. Literally meaning ‘beggar’, bhikṣu often refers to 
Buddhist mendicants/monks.
Fig. 5.7: A Buddha image seated under a toraṇa  featuring the motifs of Kāla-head and makara  (Photo: Nuwan 
Gajanayaka)
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   86 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 95] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko87
few panels at Candi Pawon (Fig. 5.12) and 
Candi Mendut (Fig. 5.13). Similarly, Njoto 
(2014: 176) observes that images of kalpa -
taru often appear along with a makara (or 
Kāla) and clouds, which denote fertility and 
prosperity.
Today, many Bodhi trees are planted around 
the base of Borobudur. It is said that a Bodhi tree 
Fig. 5.8: The subduing of Māra, first gallery, chief wall, northwest, panel 94, Lalitavistara , Borobudur. 
(Source: Photodharma.net)
Fig. 5.9: The Buddha performing the caṅkramaṇa  to the bodhighara , first gallery, chief wall, northeast, panel 100, 
Lalitavistara , Borobudur. (Source: Anandajoti/Dharma Records) grown from the sapling from Anurādhapura—
which, in turn, is descended from the original Śrī 
Mahābodhi at Bodhgayā—once stood in a corner 
at Borobudur; but it had to be removed during a 
recent restoration (Bernet Kempers 1976: 11).
Finally, the bodhighara can be seen on the 
leaf-shaped puppets in the traditional Javanese 
shadow-puppetry known as wayang purwa, kayon, 
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   87 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 96] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse88
Fig. 5.10: Sāradvaja-bhikṣu and Sudhana, Second gallery, chief wall, south side, panel 22, Gaṇḍavyūha , 
Borobudur. (Source: Virtual Museum of Images & Sounds)
Fig. 5.11: Kalpataru , first gallery, inner east balustrade, upper panel 371, Borobudur. (Source: Virtual 
Museum of Images & Sounds)
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   88 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 97] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko89
Fig. 5.12: Kalpataru , Candi Pawon. (Source: Photodharma.net)
Fig. 5.13: Kubera with his yakṣa s and the kalpataru s, Candi Mendut. (Source: Photodharma.net)
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   89 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 98] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse90
and gunungan. The puppet (Fig. 5.14) represents 
the tree of life, which springs out from a house. 
It also symbolizes the axis of the universe that 
connects the human world with that of the spirits. 
On the other side of the puppet, the demon Kāla 
is painted with a halo of flames that represents 
the destructive forces of the universe. The tree 
of life in the Javanese culture, too, is identified 
with the kalpataru (wish-fulling trees) whose 
iconography appears in various works of art and 
Fig. 5.15: Bas-relief of Kṛṣṇa and Satyabhama with the kalpataru . 
(Photo: V&A, taken by the author)Fig. 5.14: A traditional Javanese gunungan , inv. 
Nr: IS. 10-1979. (Source: Tropenmuseum)architecture throughout the island (Njoto 2014: 
176–177). A bas-relief fashioned out of volcanic 
stone displayed at the Victoria and Albert Museum 
(Fig. 5.15), dating to about 1425 CE, shows Kṛṣṇa 
and Satyabhama acquiring the kalpataru Parijāta 
(a type of jasmine tree). This is part of a popular 
legend from a Javanese court poem preserved 
through performances of the wayang purwa, which 
demonstrates that tree worship was prevalent in 
Javanese culture.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   90 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 99] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko91
conclusion
Keeping in mind that Ratu Boko is linked to the 
Abhayagirivihāra, and having taken into account 
various historical, archaeological, textual, and 
iconographical evidence in Sri Lanka and Central 
Java, one can conclude that the veneration of 
the Bodhi trees is a long-standing tradition on 
both islands. Through analysis and comparison 
of the evidence, we can hypothesize that Candi 
Pembakaran may have been either a bodhighara  
or a stūpa. I point out, however, that there is no 
evident trace of a bodhighara, which is an im -
portant component of the pañcāvāsas (five-fold 
parts) of any Sri Lankan monastery, and which 
resembles that of the monastery at Anurādhapura 
on which the Ratu Boko was allegedly modelled. 
Moreover, if Candi Pembakaran was a stūpa, or 
even a minor cetiya , I would imagine it to be 
too small for a monastic complex built with a 
royal patronage that spans a total of 250,000 
square metres. Additionally, the remains of the 
pillar bases indicate that pillars, which may have 
supported some sort of roof, must have stood 
there rather than the dome ceiling of a stūpa—I 
make this assumption by looking at Javanese and 
Sri Lankan stūpas where there is no evidence to 
demonstrate that the domes are being supported 
by pillars. Thus, on the basis of the available ev-
idence, I surmise that that the structure referred 
to as Candi Pembakaran is more likely to have 
been a bodhighara rather than a stūpa.
Further research on this topic is required. 
Firstly, a renewed excavation with the intention 
of finding traces of either a bodhighara or a stūpa  
at Candi Pembakaran is necessary. Secondly, more 
research using primary and secondary resources regarding the connection between Sri Lanka and 
Java needs to be undertaken by experts in San -
skrit, Pali, and Old Javanese languages as well as 
by archaeologists and art historians. For instance, 
the plan of Ratu Boko can be compared in detail 
with every type of monastery plan prescribed in 
the Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyāśāstra. Tentatively, with 
the gopura of Candi Pembakaran facing west, the 
plan would fit into the Hastyārāma III category 
according to Silva’s studies on the Mañjuśrīvāstu-
vidyāśāstra. But this can be ascertained only after precise comparisons have been made with the help 
of modern technology. 
Finally, I am of the opinion that it is unlikely 
that Candi Pembakaran was used as a crematori-
um for monastics as funeral pyres as big as this 
structure are unheard of in any Buddhist tradition; 
moreover, the auspicious makara motif denotes 
that it is a structure for worship. Neither was it used 
as a homakuṇḍa or a yāgaśālā (sacrificial-fire hall) 
as the pit, measuring 26 by 26 metres, is again too 
big for the ritual; it would have required thousands 
of gallons of ghee to keep the fire burning, which 
would have been impractical and prohibitively ex-
pensive for a group of monks living on a hilltop 
even if they were sponsored by kings. The large 
amount of ash, which was discovered by archae-
ologists when they first explored the candi, was 
nothing extraordinary: the area has been prone to 
Mount Merapi’s volcanic activities for centuries 
and the ash collected in the pit was clear evidence 
that it had been neglected until its discovery at the 
beginning of the 21st century. 
References
Acri, Andrea. 2016. ‘Once More on the “Ratu Boko 
Mantra”: Magic, Realpolitik, and Bauddha-
Śaiva Dynamics in Ancient Nusantara’, in 
Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in 
Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons, pp. 323–348. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.
Bandaranayake, Senake. 1974. Sinhalese Monastic 
Architecture. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Basnayake, H.T. 1986. Sri Lankan Monastic Archi-
tecture. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
Bernet Kempers, A.J. 1976. Ageless Borobudur: Bud -
dhist Mystery in Stone, Decay and Restoration, 
Mendut and Pawon, Folklife in Ancient Java.  
Wassenaar: Servire.
Bosch, F.D.K. 1918. Rapporten van het Oud -
heidkundigen Dienst in Nederlandsch-Indië 
1915. Inventaris der Hindoe-oudheden op den 
grondslag van Dr. R.D.M. Verbeek’s Oudheden 
van Java samengesteld op het Oudheidkundig 
Bureau onder leiding van Dr. F.D.K. Bosch.  
Vol. 2. Weltefreden: Albrecht & Co./’s-Graven -
hage: Martinus Nijhoff. 
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   91 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 100] ---
Saran Suebsantiwongse92
Brandes, Jan L.A. 1903. ‘Driemaandelijksch rapport 
over Juli, Augustus en September 1903’, in 
Rapporten van den Commissie in Nederlandsch-
Indië voor Oudheidkundig Onderzoek op Java 
en Madoera, pp. 63–68. Batavia: Albrecht & 
Co/’s-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Brumund, Jan F.G. 1854. Indiana. Verzameling 
van stukken van onderscheiden aard, over 
landen, volken, oudheden en geschiedenis van 
den Indische archipel. 2 vols. Amsterdam: Van 
Kampen.
de Casparis, Johannes G. 1956. Selected Inscriptions 
from the 7th to the 9th Century A.D. Bandung: 
Masa Baru.
. 1961. ‘New Evidence on Cultural Relations 
between Java and Ceylon in Ancient Times’, 
Artibus Asiae 24/3–4: 241–248.
Cunningham, Alexander. 1879. The Stūpa of 
Bhārhut: A Buddhist Monument Ornamented 
with Numerous Sculptures. London: W.H. Allen 
and Co.
Degroot, Véronique. 2006. ‘The Archaeological 
Remains of Ratu Boko: From Sri Lankan 
Buddhism to Hinduism’, Indonesia and the 
Malay World 34/98: 55–74.
Dhammika, S. (trans.). 1993. The Edicts of King 
Aśoka. Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society.
Fergusson, James. 1971. Tree and Serpent Worship. 
Delhi: Oriental Publishers.
Fernando, W.B. Marcus. 1967. Ancient City of 
Anuradhapura. Colombo: Archaeological 
Department.
Geiger, Wilhelm (trans.). 1950. The Mahāvaṃsa. 
Colombo, Sri Lanka: Ceylon Govt. Information 
Department. 
Goswami, Bijoya (ed.). 2001. Lalitavistara. Kolkata: 
Asiatic Society. 
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014. ‘The “Greatly Ferocious” Spell: 
A dhāraṇī Inscribed on a Lead-Bronze Foil 
Unearthed near Borobudur’, in Kurt Tropper 
(ed.), Epigraphic Evidence in the Pre-Modern 
Buddhist World, Proceedings of the Eponymous 
Conference Held in Vienna, 14–15 Oct. 2011,  
pp. 1–36. Wien: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und 
Buddhistische Studien Universität Wien.
Groeneveldt, Willem P. 1886. Bestuursvergadering 
van Dinsdag 11 Mei 1886, VI. Notulen van het 
Bataviaasch Genootschap 24: 79–81.Guṇasékara, B. (ed.). 1954. Rājāvaliya. Colombo: 
Govt. Printer. 
Hettiaratchi, S.B. and T.G. Kulatunge. 1992. 
Abhayagiriya. 1st ed. Colombo: UNESCO 
World Food Programme, Sri Lanka Cultural 
Triangle, Abhayagiri Vihāra Project.
Horner, I.B. 1975. The Minor Anthologies of the 
Pāli Canon: Part 3 , The Buddhava ṃsa. London: 
Pali Text Society.
Ijzerman, J.W. 1891. Beschrijving der oudheden 
nabij de grens der residentie’s Soerakarta en 
Djogdjakarta.  Batavia/’s-Gravenhage: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 
Jayasuriya, M.H.F., Leelananda Prematilleke, and 
Roland Silva. 1995. Mañjuśrī Vāstuvidyāśāstra. 
Colombo: The Archaeological Survey of Sri 
Lanka and The Central Cultural Fund.
Jordaan, Roy and Brian Colless. 2004. ‘The Ratu 
Boko mantra and the Śailendras’, Berkala 
Arkeologi 24/1: 56–65.
Klokke, Marijke J. 1993. The Tantri Reliefs on 
Ancient Javanese Candi. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Kulatunge, T.G. 1999. Abhayagiri Vihara at 
Anuradhapura. Colombo: Ministry of Culture 
and Religious Affairs.
Legge, James. 1965. A Record of Buddhistic King-
doms. New York: Dover Publications. [Reprint; 
1st edition Clarendon Press, 1886]
Mackay, Ernest. 1989. Early Indus Civilizations. 
Nagar: Eastern Book House.
Miksic, John. 1990. Borobudur: Golden Tales of 
the Buddhas. Berkeley: Periplus Editions,  
Inc.
. 2015. Kraton Ratu Boko: A Javanese Site 
of Enigmatic Beauty. Yogyakarta: PT (Persero) 
Taman Wisata Candi Borobudur, Prambanan 
& Ratu Boko.
Mukhopadhyaya, Sujitkumar (ed.). 1963. Aśo-  
kāvadāna. New Delhi: Sahitya Akademi. 
Njoto, Hélène. 2014. ‘À propos d’une pièce en bois 
sculptée de l’art du Pasisir (xve s.-xviie s.): le 
« kalpataru »  du musée de Tuban à Java-Est’, 
Archipel 88: 170–188. 
Nou, Jean-Louis and Louis Frédéric (eds.). 1994. 
Borobudur. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale.
Rahula, Walpola. 1966. History of Buddhism 
in Ceylon: The Anuradhapura Period, 3rd 
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   92 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 101] ---
Candi Pembakaran at Ratu Boko93
Century BC–10th Century AD. Colombo: M.D. 
Gunasena. 
Seneviratna, Anuradha. 1994. Ancient Anuradhapu -
ra: The Monastic City. Colombo: Archaeologi-
cal Survey Department.
Silva, Roland. 1989. Religious Architecture in Early 
and Medieval Sri Lanka. Leiden: Kris Repro 
Meppel.
Sirisena, W.M. 1978. Sri Lanka and South-East Asia: 
Political, Religious and Cultural Relations from 
A.D. c. 1000 to c. 1500. Leiden: Brill.
Snodgrass, Adrian. 1985. The Symbolism of the 
Stupa. Studies on Southeast Asia. Ithaca, N.Y: 
Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University.
Strong, John S. 2014. The Legend of King Aśoka: 
A Study and Translation of the Aśokāvadāna. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Stutterheim, Willem F. 1926. ‘De Bouwvallen op 
den heuvel van Ratoe Baka bij Prambanan’, 
Djåwå 6: 129–135.
Suebsantiwongse, Saran. 2021. The Rise and Rites of 
Tantric Kingship in the Sāmrājyalakṣmīpīṭhikā, 
a Hybrid Nibandha from Vijayanagara. PhD 
dissertation, University of Cambridge. 
Sundberg, Jeffrey. 2003. ‘A Buddhist Mantra Recov -
ered from the Ratu Boko Plateau; A Preliminary 
Study of Its Implications for Sailendra-Era Java’, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  
159/1: 163–188.. 2016. ‘Mid-9th-century Adversity for 
Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in  
Java: Lord Kumbhayoni and the “Rag-wearer” 
Monks of the Abhayahiri-vihāra’, in Esoteric 
Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 349–379. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
Tournier, Vincent. 2014. ‘Mahākāśyapa, His 
Lineage, and the Wish for Buddhahood: 
Reading anew the Bodhgayā Inscriptions of 
Mahānāman’,  Indo-Iranian Journal   57/1–2: 
1–60.
Viennot, Odette. 1954. Le culte de l’arbre dans l’Inde 
ancienne: Textes et monuments brahmaniques 
et bouddhiques. Paris: Presses universitaires 
de France.
Vogel, Jean P. 1926. Indian Serpent-lore: Or, The 
Nāgas in Hindu Legend and Art. London: 
Arthur Probsthain. 
Walshe, Maurice O’C. 1995. The Long Discourses of 
the Buddha: A Translation of the Dīghanikāya. 
Boston: Wisdom Publications. 
Wijesuriya, Gamini Senaratne. 1998. Buddhist 
Meditation Monasteries of Ancient Sri Lanka. 
Colombo: Department of Archaeology, Gov -
ernment of Sri Lanka.
Williams, Joanna. 1975. ‘Sārnāth Gupta Steles of 
the Buddha’s Life’, Ars Orientalis 10: 171–192.
05_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   93 22/6/22   7:11 PM

--- [Page 102] ---
Chapter 6
The Conqueror of the Three Worlds: The Cult of 
Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of 
Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains
Michel Gauvain
introduction1
Trailokyavijaya, the ‘Conqueror of the Three 
Worlds’, also called Vajrahūṃkāra (‘Ada -
mantine Hūṃ Producing’), is a wrathful 
manifestation of Vajrapāṇi, sometimes described 
as a transformation of Vajrasattva (and thus iden-  
1. This chapter is a revised and abridged version of my 
dissertation for the MA Buddhist Art: History and Con -
servation at The Courtauld Institute of Art, University of 
London. I would like to express my profound gratitude 
to my former supervisor, Giovanni Verri, for his patient  
guidance, encouragement and advice during the entire 
process of research, writing and revision of the original work. 
I am also grateful to Richard Blurton and Alexandra Green 
(The British Museum) for having facilitated my access to  
the figurine of Trailokyavijaya in The British Museum  
Collection; to Mohan Pratap, Nazia Kamal, Abira Bhat -
tacharya (National Museum, New Delhi), Michaela  
Appel (Museum Fünf Kontinente, München), Fifia Ward-
hani (National Museum of Indonesia, Jakarta), Kaneda 
Ryōren (Daihonzan Daikakuji, Kyōto), and Sarah Ritz-
mann (Sotheby’s) for having supplied me with images 
from their respective institutions; to Rob Linrothe 
(Northwestern University), Susan L. Huntington (Ohio 
State University), Mori Masahide (Kanazawa University), 
Itō Naoko (Hiroshima University), Hiram Woodward 
(Walters Art Museum), Swati Chemburkar (Banaras 
Hindu University), and Gary Lee Todd (Sias University) 
for having provided me with images from their own pho-
tographic collections; and to Aoki Tomoko (Kongōbuji 
Head Temple, Kōyasan), who wholeheartedly support -
ed me with extraordinary practicality and dedication. 
Without the help of all these people, many points of this 
research would have remained obscure. I would also like 
to extend thanks to Peter Sharrock (SOAS), Andrea Acri 
(EPHE), Robert Mayer, Cathy Cantwell (University of 
Oxford), Iain Sinclair (Nan Tien Institute and University 
of Queensland) and Jeffrey Sundberg, for the excellenttical in essence with the Buddha Mahāvairocana), 
or as an emanation of the Buddha Akṣobhya.2 He 
belongs to a category of beings whom Linrothe 
defined as ‘wrathful destroyers of obstacles’ ( kro-
dha-vighnāntaka ), a class of esoteric deities whose 
task is not merely the protection of the devotees 
or the intimidation of recalcitrant beings, but also, 
and most importantly, the removal of external 
and internal hindrances and the transmutation 
of ignorance into wisdom.3 While the cult of 
Trailokyavijaya spanned almost the entire Asian 
continent over many centuries, it appears to have 
achieved considerable prominence in Java in the 
8th–11th centuries. As it will become apparent from 
several elements analysed below, the communities 
of South Sea States, and in particular those of Sri 
Lanka, might have exerted a major influence on 
the transmission to East Asia of textual, artistic 
and ritual aspects related to this deity.
The aim of this chapter is to cast some light 
upon the diffusion and nature of the cult of 
Trailokyavijaya in Java between the 8th and the 
11th century, through the analysis of epigraphical 
and sculptural remains. These two types of artefacts 
conversation, support, and perceptive comments that have 
helped me keeping on track juggling my research. Words 
are powerless to express my gratitude to the Ho Family 
Foundation, which supported me financially for the whole 
academic year by awarding me a generous scholarship. 
The present chapter, and my participation to the entire 
programme at The Courtauld, would not have been possible 
without their inestimable help.
2. Mallmann 1986: 381–382; Snodgrass 1988: 277, 719; 
Sørensen 2011: 108. About Vajrapāṇi, see Lamotte 2003a 
and 2003b.
3. Linrothe 1999: 12, 152–159, and 2000: 25–27.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   94 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 103] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains95
have different characteristics, and thus different 
analytical methods will be employed. Inscriptions 
are often dated, have a more or less explicit content, 
can include formulas charged with multiple eso -
teric meanings, and in many cases come from a 
very precise location, possibly from a meaningful 
context: as such, they can often be put in relation 
with specific figures, communities, buildings, texts, 
and ritual practices. The statuettes from Java, on 
the other hand, are undated, and their precise 
provenance is unknown; however, their approxi-
mate period of manufacture and their connection 
with specific texts, traditions, and regions of the 
Buddhist world could be reconstructed by means 
of their style and iconography.
The main body of this chapter will discuss the 
relevant epigraphic and artistic production from 
Java by making use of both primary and secondary 
sources. Other kinds of local and foreign sources, 
such as Indo-Tibetan and Sino-Japanese texts and 
artefacts, or Old Javanese literature preserved in 
Bali, will be referred to throughout the chapter, as a 
means of contextualization. The retrieved informa -
tion will be critically combined in the conclusions.
It is to be noted that many details found in 
the scholarly literature specifically referring to the 
pieces of art under investigation had to be revised 
in the light of new photographic evidence, kindly 
provided by the holding institutions. Further, in 
the case of the statuette of Trailokyavijaya at The 
British Museum, it was possible to undertake a 
technical investigation—in addition to the inves-
tigation of its physical, curatorial and conservation 
history—to understand its making and shed light 
on the now-lost attributes and iconography.
The iconography of Trailokyavijaya: general 
traits
Trailokyavijaya is generally described as blue in 
colour and enveloped in flames, with protruding 
fangs and an extremely fierce appearance. He is 
commonly represented with one face and two 
arms or four faces and eight arms,4 often wearing 
a crown or a tall headgear, armlets and wristlets, 
and a short dhotī. He usually holds two hands 
4. In some cases, only three faces are represented, the 
fourth being implied at the back of the image.crossed in front of his chest, to form his charac -
teristic mudrā, known as trailokyavijaya-mudrā, or 
vajrahūṃkāra-mudrā: the two fists, which may or 
may not hold a vajra /vajra -bell, have the index and 
little fingers up, and are joined back to back, with 
the little fingers interlocked. In the rest of the hands, 
he usually holds attributes: a bow in one of the 
left hands and an arrow in one of the right hands 
appear to be a constant feature of the iconography, 
while the other āyudhas vary, generally among 
the following implements: sword, noose, wheel, 
elephant-goad, vajra, baton, khaṭvāṅga, trident, 
or vajra-lance.5
While in East Asia he is also found portrayed 
in seated form,6 he is most commonly represent-
ed in the so-called pratyālīḍha posture, in the act 
of trampling the two recumbent figures of Ma -
heśvara (Great Lord, Śiva) and his consort Umā 
(the Goddess, Pārvatī), pushing the former down 
to the ground with the left foot, and leaning with 
slightly less weight on the breast of the latter with 
the right foot.7
Diffusion of the myth: scriptural, artistic, and 
epigraphic evidence
Indian subcontinent
The iconography depicting Trailokyavijaya standing 
on Maheśvara and Umā derives from a powerful 
myth of subjugation whose locus classicus is found 
in the second chapter of the Sarvatathāgatatat -
tvasaṅgraha (STTS),8 a work which probably took 
5. Lokesh Chandra 1999: 3632–3658.
6. Linrothe 1992: 413–414.
7. Bhattacharyya 1958: 184–185; Snodgrass 1988: 719; 
Lokesh Chandra 1999: 3632–3658; Herrmann-Pfandt 
2008–2009: 33.
8. Appendix 6.1 at the end of this chapter presents a résumé 
of the myth, based on the account reported in the San -
skrit edition of the STTS (preserved in the Kesar Library 
of Kathmandu, in the form of palm-leaf manuscript, prob-
ably dating back to the 9th–10th century) as translated in 
Italian by Tucci (1932: 135–145) and in English by Snellgrove 
(1987: 134–141) and Davidson (1995: 547–555), and also on the 
account reported in the Chinese edition of the same text, as 
summarized in French by Iyanaga (1985: 667–682). See also 
Śaśibāl ā 1986: 66–68; Davidson 1991: 200–202, and 2002: 
150–151; Linrothe 1992: 347–352, and 1999: 183–185. A number 
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   95 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 104] ---
Michel Gauvain96
shape in South India during the second half of the 
7th century (possibly slightly later than the Vairo-
canābhisambodhi ). The enormous influence of the 
STTS rapidly spread to eastern India and Kashmir, 
and then abroad, leading to a wide dissemination 
of the cult of Trailokyavijaya, and of the narrative 
of his subjugation of Śiva, throughout Asia.9 
To date, just five sculptures have been iden -
tified as Trailokyavijaya in India (from Nālandā  
and Bodhgayā in Bihar, and from Achutrajpur, in 
of scholars, commenting on Trailokyavijaya’s iconography, 
took Maheśvara straightforwardly as a symbol for Hindu-
ism, and considered the representation of his subjugation 
nothing but a way, for the Buddhists, to denigrate Hindu-
ism itself. In their opinion, the images of Trailokyavijaya 
trampling on Maheśvara and Umā were produced in order 
to exalt Buddhism, insult Hinduism, and win converts. Pal 
has called one such image ‘a blatant declaration of sectar-
ian bias’ (1975: 173); Saraswati notes that Trailokyavijaya’s 
iconography ‘revolves round an animosity to Hinduism’ 
(1977: LXIV). Bhattacharyya mentioned a Trailokyavijaya 
image as an example of ‘How the Buddhists of the tantric 
age attempted to exhibit the superiority of their gods over 
those of the Brahmanical faith’ (1932: 119). Nath asserted 
that Trailokyavijaya ‘was conceived only to humiliate the 
Hindu deities Śiva and Pārvatī’ (1986: 69). Davidson (1995: 
547–549), on the other hand, argued that even if the myth 
probably arose in a rural context permeated by a sense of 
antagonism, it was soon absorbed into monastic institutions, 
where it came to be re-elaborated, acquiring multiple levels 
of significance (for different perspectives on the meanings 
assumed by the myth, see Stein 1973: 467; Iyanaga 1985: 
731–743; Snodgrass 1988: 722–723; Linrothe 1990: 20–22, 
1992: 353–357, and 1999: 186–188; Davidson 1991: 214–218). 
As Amar convincingly suggested (2012: 175–178), the creation 
of the myth of subjugation should probably be understood 
as a pondered response of the Buddhist establishment of 
the area of Bodhgayā to the growing influence of Śaivism 
in the region: a strategy of appropriation devised by specific 
individuals within the saṁgha for the purpose of attracting 
ordinary Śaiva devotees through the inclusion of Śiva within 
the Buddhist pantheon, as a minor deity. The myth, in fact, 
does not end with the defeat of Maheśvara, but with his 
being revived and integrated into the maṇḍala together 
with his former entourage, and this mythical event was 
apparently paralleled, in concrete terms, by the installation 
of an image of Mahādeva and of other brahmanical gods 
within the Mahābodhi complex in Bodhgayā. 
9. Silk 2015: 373, 379.Fig. 6.1: Trailokyavijaya from Nālandā Monastery Site 1. 
Stone, 17.5 cm, late 8th or 9th century. National Museum, 
New Delhi, acc. no. 47.63 © National Museum, New 
Delhi.
Fig. 6.2: Trailokyavijaya from Achutrajpur (Odisha). 
Bronze, 48.1 cm, ca. 10th century. Odisha State Museum, 
Bhubaneswar, acc. no. 239 (Faculty Collections, North -
western University Libraries. ‘Trailokyavijaya’, Rob 
Linrothe Image Collection. Accessed 30 August 2020. 
https://dc.library.northwestern.edu/items/1eff8999-1b53-
4c5b-af29-bcf3b7e7bebd).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   96 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 105] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains97
Fig. 6.3: Trailokyavijaya fragment from Nālandā. 
Stone, 121 cm, ca. 10th century. Nālandā Museum, 
acc. no. 00002 (Asian Iconographic Resources 
database). 
Fig. 6.4: Trailokyavijaya from Nālandā Monastery 
Site 9. Bronze, 25 cm, ca. 850–950. Patna Museum, 
acc. no. 8457 (Photo by John C. Huntington, Courtesy 
of the John C. and Susan L. Huntington Photograph -
ic Archive of Buddhist and Asian Art).
Fig. 6.5: Trailokyavijaya from the shed of the Mahant 
Compound in Bodhgayā. Stone, 148 cm, 10th century 
(Photo by John C. Huntington, Courtesy of the John 
C. and Susan L. Huntington Photographic Archive of 
Buddhist and Asian Art).
Odisha), both in stone and in bronze, dating from 
the late 8th to the 10th century (Figs. 6.1 to 6.5).10 
China
A summary version of the myth of subjugation 
was known in China thanks to the Synopsis of 
the Eighteen Assemblies in the Vajraśekhara Yoga  
(Jin’gangdingjing yujia shiba hui zhigui, 金剛頂
經瑜伽十八會指歸 ; T 869), a text composed by 
Amoghavajra ( 不空金剛 ; 705–774 CE)11 in the third 
quarter of the 8th century, soon after his travel 
to Sri Lanka (741–746 CE).12 The same narrative 
10. Linrothe 1999: 194–207.
11. See Khokhlov 2022.
12. Iyanaga 1985: 660; Silk 2015: 373. Even before Amogha -
vajra’s Synopsis of the Eighteen Assemblies in the Vajraśekha-
ra Yoga, the story of the subjugation of Śiva was introduced 
in China through the Commentary on the Mahāvairo -
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   97 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 106] ---
Michel Gauvain98
Fig. 6.6: Trailokyavijaya unearthed from Anguo-si 
temple in Xi’an. Marble, 88 cm, ca. 775. Beilin 
Museum (Photo: Gary Lee Todd, 2014. Accessed 13 
September 2020. https://flic.kr/p/nBwRc9).appears, with more or less details, in several other 
texts and ritual manuals believed to have been 
produced by Amoghavajra or by his school (i.e. 
T 1133, T 1134A, T 1134B).13 The first full-fledged 
Chinese translation of the STTS, the Yiqie rulai 
zhenshi shedasheng xianzheng sanmei dajiaowang 
jing (一切如來眞實攝大乘現證三昧大教王經 ; T 
882), was produced much later, between 1012 and 
1015, by Dānapāla ( 施護 ; ?–1017).14
A marble Trailokyavijaya, dating ca. 775, was 
found as part of a sculptural group unearthed from 
the site of the ancient Anguo-si temple, in Chang’an, 
one of the Chinese capitals of the Tangs (618–907), 
corresponding to the present-day Xi’an (Fig. 6.6).15 
In the same city, the figure of Trailokyavijaya was 
found engraved, as part of a set of eight vidyārājas, 
on the base of a bronze statuette known as Kneeling 
Bodhisattva holding Relics, which was excavated 
from beneath the pagoda of the Famen-si temple 
and appears to have been offered by the Imperial 
house of the Tang in 874.16 From an 11th-century  
chronicle by the Japanese Tendai monk Jōjin  
(成尋 ; 1011–1081), the San Tendai Godai san ki   
(參天台五臺山記 ), we know that in Chang’an there 
were several temples dedicated to individual deities, 
one of which enshrined a two-armed Trailokyavi-
jaya.17 From Tang China, we also have a standing, 
canābhisambodhisūtra (Da Piluzhena chengfo jing shu,  
大毘盧遮那成佛經疏 ; T 1796), a work composed by Yixing  
(一行 ; 683–727) on the basis of the teachings of 
Śubhākarasiṃha ( 善無畏 ; 637–735), which is believed to 
have been completed in 725. In this account, the author 
makes explicit reference to the STTS as the source of the 
narrative, but replaces the figure of Trailokyavijaya with 
that of Acala. Trailokyavijaya appears in the Commentary 
on the Mahāvairocanābhisambodhisūtra, but with different 
functions (Iyanaga 1985: 682–723).
13. Iyanaga 1985: 664. References to Trailokyavijaya’s 
posture of subjugation appear also in T 1003, T 1056, T 1124, 
T 1209 and T 1210, all of which are attributed to Amogha-
vajra.
14. Iyanaga 1985: 660; Silk 2015: 373. 
15. Nara National Museum 1988: 205–206; Lai 2006:  
45–47, 53.
16. Lai 2006: 195–197, 344. For information about the 
finding and the findings, see Karetzky 1994 and Sharf 2011.
17. Orzech 2006: 151–152 and Orzech, Sørensen and Payne 
2011: 427. See CBETA Electronic Tripitaka Collection 
(CBETA 電子佛典集成 ), Dazangjing Bu Bian ( 大藏經補eight-armed Trailokyavijaya in bronze, now in a 
private collection, which apparently passed un -
noticed by Western scholars.18 Trailokyavijaya is 
also found portrayed as part of a group of four or 
five vidyārājas on several bronze vajra-bells pro-
duced in China under the Tang, or in Korea under 
the late Unified Silla (780–935) or Koryŏ Dynasty 
(918–1392).19 He was probably depicted in a paint-
ing on silk of Thousand-Armed Avalokiteśvara 
from Dunhuang, now in the possession of The 
British Museum (BM 1919,0101,0.35), dating from 
the 1st half of the 9th century (his name appears in 
a cartouche beside an almost lost wrathful figure 
holding a bow).20 
編), vol. 32, n. 174, fascicle 7, 400c.
18. See Sekine 2011: 5.
19. Okazaki 1966; Soper 1966: 35; Sekine 2011: 4–5, 39–45.
20. Whitfield 1982–1983: 314, fig. 18-1 and fig. 53; Linrothe 
1992: 393–395.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   98 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 107] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains99
Himalayas
As for China, the STTS was apparently known in 
Tibet already in the late 8th or early 9th century.21 
The first full-fledged Tibetan translation of the text, 
the De bzhin gshegs pa thams cad kyi de kho na 
nyid bsdus pa (D479/P112), was produced only in 
the late 10th century or in the first half of the 11th 
century, by Rin chen bzang po (954–1055) and the 
Kashmiri Śraddhākaravarman.22
The deity is depicted in the ca. 12th-century 
wall paintings at Alchi’s Dukhang and Sumda, in 
Ladakh,23 as well as in the ca. 15th-century wall 
paintings at Gyantse’s Kumbum, in Tibet.24
Japan
A copy of Vajrabodhi/Vajrabuddhi’s ( 金剛智 ; 
671–741) abridged collection of ritual practic -
es from the STTS, titled Sūtra for Recitation 
Abridged from the Vajraśekhara Yoga ( Jin’gang -
ding yujia zhong lüechu niansong jing, 金剛頂
瑜伽中略出念誦經 ; T 866), has been found in 
an old manuscript collection compiled between 
736 and 756 CE, preserved at Tōdai-ji, in Nara; 
a manuscript of the STTS itself was borrowed 
by a monk of the Saidai-ji from the Tōdai-ji  
21. Kanō 2015: 379.
22. Ibid.: 373. Rin chen bzang po and Śraddhākaravarman 
are also credited for the translation of three Indian com -
mentaries to the STTS, by Buddhaguhya (late 8th century; 
D2501/P3324), Śākyamitra (8th or 9th century; D2503/P3326), 
and Ānandagarbha (8th or 9th century; D2510/P3333). These 
commentaries present some differences in their iconograph -
ical interpretations. Kanō, following Lim (1964: 335, 337), 
states that the commentary by Ānandagarbha, titled Tat -
tvālokakarī, has been especially influential on the artistic 
production of Western Tibet and Southeast Asia (Kanō 
2015: 374), but this perspective is not unanimously agreed 
upon (see for instance Woodward 2004: 348, fn. 55). 
23. At Alchi’s Dukhang, Trailokyavijaya is found in the 
eastern quadrant of a Vajradhātu maṇḍala (Pal 1982), at the 
centre of a Trailokyavijaya maṇḍala (Katō and Matsunaga 
1981), and in a Vāgīśvara Mañjuśrī Dharmadhātu maṇḍala 
(Fig. 6.7), while at Sumda he is represented in a Vāgīśvara 
Mañjuśrī Dharmadhātu maṇḍala (Linrothe 1999: 207–210).
24. Tucci 1989, part. 3, fig. 341; Ricca and Lo Bue 1993: 
74–87, 157; Linrothe 1999: 211.in 772.25 However, the official transmission of the 
tradition of the STTS to Japan, with its system -
atic initiations, teachings and practices, began 
in 806, with the return of Kōbō Daishi Kūkai  
(弘法大師空海 ; 774–835) from Chang’an.26 There, 
Kūkai studied under Huiguo ( 惠果 ; 746–805), who 
had inherited the transmission of the STTS from 
Amoghavajra.27 Among the Siddham texts brought 
to Japan by Kūkai, one is titled the King of Eulo-
gies of Vajragarbha-Trailokyavijaya ( Jin’gangzang 
Xiangsanshi zanwang, 金剛藏降三世讃王 ).28 
In Japan, a life-size, wooden image of Trailok-
yavijaya survives as part of the karma maṇḍala of 
Tōji Lecture Hall (ca. 839), whose vidyārāja section 
is said to be based on the esoteric ‘translation’ of 
the Sūtra for Humane Kings, known as The Perfec-
tion of Wisdom Sūtra for Humane Kings Protecting 
Their Countries ( Renwang huguo bore boluomiduo 
jing, 仁王護國般若波羅蜜多經 ; T 246), completed 
by Amoghavajra in 766, or more specifically on 
a ritual manual related to that scripture, known 
as Instructions for the Rites, Chants, and Medita-
tions of the Prajñāpāramitā Dhāraṇī Scripture for 
Humane Kings Who Wish to Protect Their States  
(Renwang huguo bore boluomiduo jing tuoluoni 
niansong yigui, 仁王護國般若波羅蜜多經陀羅尼
念誦儀軌 ; T 994), attributed to the same author 
but probably produced by his disciples.29 Trailok-
yavijaya is also represented in both the Taizō and 
Kongōkai maṇḍalas of the Tōji Shingon’in (9th 
century),30 which on the whole are based on the 
Vairocanābhisambodhi and on the STTS, respec -
tively.31 He also appears in the Godaison Zuzō, a 
25. Kanō 2015: 380.
26. Ibid. : 380–381.
27. Abé 1999.
28. Unfortunately, it may now be lost (Giebel 2012: 215–216).
29. Nihon bijutsu zenshū 4: 235; Ogawa and Nishimura 
1986–1987; Linrothe 1992: 387–390; Bogel 2010: 84, 313–337, 
and 2011: 936–954; Wang 2018: 172, 211, 216–217. For an 
annotated translation and an extended consideration of 
the esoteric version of the Sūtra for Humane Kings , see 
Orzech 1998.
30. Linrothe 1992: 390–392; Ishimoto 2011: 38, 207.
31. In the Taizō maṇḍala, Trailokyavijaya figures three 
times, under different names and forms, although always 
seated: as Trailokyavijaya and Vajrahūṃkāra in the 
vidyādhara quarter, and as Candratilaka in the Vajrapāṇi 
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   99 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 108] ---
Michel Gauvain100
Fig. 6.7: Trailokyavijaya in the Vāgīśvara Mañjuśrī Dharmadhātu maṇḍala, Alchi Dukhang (Ladakh). Wall 
painting, ca. 12th century (Faculty Collections, Northwestern University Libraries. ‘Alchi Dukhang. Interior 
detail: Trailokyavijaya’, Rob Linrothe Image Collection. Accessed 30 August 2020. https://dc.library.
northwestern.edu/items/6ea40ce9-34b8-4d68-8fd0-524457ff645c).
collection of iconographical drawings by Kōgon, 
which is dated 1250 but is said to be based on the 
drawings of wrathful deities from a Ninnō-kyō 
Mandara associated with Kūkai.32 Examples of 
later images of Trailokyavijaya, both in sculpture 
and painting, are particularly abundant in Japan 
(Fig. 6.8).33 
Southeast Asia
According to a Khmer inscription (K. 397) dated 
1108, there was an image of Trailokyavijaya at 
quarter (Snodgrass 1988: 269–279, 313–316; Linrothe 1999: 
154). In the Kongōkai maṇḍala, on the other hand, he is 
depicted on the west of Akṣobhya (which is the place of 
Vajrasattva in the fundamental Perfected Body Assembly) 
in both the Trailokyavijaya Assembly (where he stands 
in pratyālīḍha posture) and the Trailokyavijaya Samaya 
Assembly (where he is represented in his samaya form) 
(Snodgrass 1988: 716–727).
32. Linrothe 1992: 386–387; Taishō Shinshū Daizōkyō  
Zuzō 6.
33. Linrothe 1992: 392–393. See also Kyōto Kokuritsu 
Hakubutsukan 1983: 159, 174; Nihon bijutsu zenshū 5: 244.Phimai, in present-day Thailand. In the inscription, 
the name of the deity is accompanied by the epithet 
of senāpati, a title indicating a general or chief 
commander of an army.34 The same title was found 
inscribed on a stone pedestal (K. 954), discovered 
in the southern gallery of the complex, which once 
presumably hosted a stone image.35 From the same 
site, we have a late 11th or early 12th-century bronze 
figurine of Trailokyavijaya, now preserved in the 
National Museum of Bangkok (Lb407) (Fig. 6.9).36 
The inscription of Prasat Ta An (K. 240), about 47 
km northwest of Angkor, in present-day Cambodia, 
refers about the foundation of a Śrī Trailokyavijaya  
34. Cœdès 1924: 346–352; Woodward 2005: 147; Harris 
2005: 18.
35. Cœdès 1937, vol. 7: 126–127.
36. Bowie 1972: 69; Woodward 2005: 154 and pl. 46A; Ly 
2006: 35–48. For a recent article on this bronze image, see 
Paul-Gupta 2019.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   100 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 109] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains101
shrine in 979.37 The deity appears to have found 
particular popularity in Java, where we have a series 
of inscriptions reporting some formulas possibly 
related to him, and a relatively conspicuous number 
of bronze figurines, which will be discussed in this 
chapter.
trailokyavijaya in java
Information from epigraphic sources
Inscriptions on stone or metal are among the most 
important primary sources for the study of the 
socio-political and religious life in Java during the 
Hindu-Buddhist period (7th–early 16th century). 
Their total amount is impressive, and the infor-
mation they provide covers a long chronology: 
as reported by Fontein, ‘according to the figures 
compiled by Damais in 1952, to which many more 
recent discoveries could be added, there are 210 
datable inscriptions from Java, dating from 732 
to 1486’.38 The earliest examples are in Sanskrit, 
while those crafted from the beginning of the 
9th century (804 CE) are almost exclusively in 
Old Javanese.39 
A large number of inscriptions are engraved 
on ‘boundary stones’, or ‘sīma stones’ (vatu 
sīma). In Buddhism, boundary stones are essen-
tially markers (nimitta) placed in a formation 
to demarcate, or create, a sacred space (sīma), 
suitable for certain ritual activities.40 In addition 
to this primary function as ‘boundary makers’, 
sīma stones can have a votive nature: they often 
bear inscriptions, usually reporting the name of 
the donor and some short, formulaic dedication, 
sometimes including details about concomitant 
large donations. In this way, boundary stones 
came to play also a role in the activity of mer -
it-making, and became a display of both religious 
piety and temporal power.41 In the specific case of 
Java, the ritual demarcation of sacred space and 
37. Woodward 2015: 239. See Cœdès 1937, vol. 3: 76–78.
38. Fontein 1990: 27.
39. Fontein 1971: 37; Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke  
1988: 2.
40. The word sīma indicates both the boundaries and the 
bounded area.
41. Murphy 2010: 86–103.
Fig. 6.8: Trailokyavijaya from a set of Five Vidyārājas 
preserved at Daikakuji, Kyōto. Wood, 66.8 cm, 1176–7 
© Kyu Saga Gosho Daihonzan Daikakuji ( 旧嵯峨御所
大本山大覚寺 ).
Fig. 6.9: Trailokyavijaya from Thailand. Bronze, 16 
cm, early 12th century. Bangkok National Museum, 
acc. no. Lb 407 (Photo: Hiram Woodward).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   101 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 110] ---
Michel Gauvain102
the cadastral demarcation of agricultural land 
tended to overlap, both in terminology and in 
practice.42 Most of the inscriptions on boundary 
stones were issued on authority of a king to record 
that an area was designated to be a sīma , a tax-ex -
empt land whose revenues were not to go to the 
authorities but were ceded to a religious founda-
tion, in perpetuity.43 The name of the king and the 
date of issue were usually mentioned, sometimes 
with details about the ceremony that accompanied 
the enactment.44 A few of these inscriptions also 
explain why the revenues were granted, providing 
data of great historical interest.45 Even so, the 
overall information retrieved from this kind of 
sources is insufficient to build a coherent picture 
of the major figures and events which character-
ized the political and religious scenario in Java 
during the 8th and 9th century.46
Other kinds of Buddhist inscriptions almost 
invariably report verses drawn from scriptural 
sources (the most recurrent examples correspond 
to the so-called ye dharmā formula, the pratītya-
samutpāda-gāthā, but we also find examples of 
other short gāthās, and a substantial number of 
mantras and dhāraṇīs). As such, these inscriptions 
might be indicative of the range of texts (and 
related practices), which had reached the island 
and were available to the learned Buddhists of 
the time. The texts, in turn, may help us in the 
challenge of understanding the context and 
function of the artefacts on which the verses are 
engraved.47
An inscription on lead-bronze foil from 
Borobudur
In March 1974, a rolled piece of leaded bronze 
foil was discovered in a plain less than 100 metres 
west of the Borobudur, in the so-called trench 35/
III, during excavations carried out in preparation 
42. Griffiths 2014a: 176–177.
43. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 2; Fontein  
1990: 27.
44. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 2.
45. Fontein 1990: 27.
46. Ibid.: 27.
47. Griffiths 2014a: 137–139.for major restoration works.48 The foil, now pre -
served at the site museum, shows an inscription 
in Sanskrit, written in Kawi script.49 On the basis 
of the peculiar shape of the akṣara ma, Griffiths 
dated the inscription back to the period comprised 
between the 8th and the early 10th century, possibly 
to the mid-9th century.50 He described the writing 
as irregular and careless, as it often happens in 
the case of dhāraṇīs written for magical purposes, 
which were not meant to be read.51 Although the 
exemplar was heavily corrupt, Griffiths managed 
to reconstruct the text on philological bases, and 
provided a translation, here slightly abridged:
[1.] Homage to the Triple Jewel (Buddha, Dhar-
ma, Saṁgha)! Homage to the fierce Vajrapāṇi, 
the great general of the Yakṣas! 
Homage to the Lord, […] who has a body 
adorned with four arms, who is of terrible ap-
pearance due to (his bearing) sword, club, axe, 
snare, cudgel (vajra), and flaming fire, whose 
right foot hangs down over the heap of twist-
ed locks of Paśupati (Śiva), whose left foot is 
placed on the pair of breasts of Pārvatī! 
Homage to the Lord, the great Cudgel-bearer! 
I shall recite the Heart named Mahāraudra 
(‘Greatly Ferocious’), extremely violent, that 
causes the destruction of all of (Śiva’s) Bhūtas 
and Gaṇas, of ferocious form, that causes terror, 
fear and conflict, that causes the success of all 
undertakings! 
[It is] like this:
[…] O ferocious … chase away the evil seizure! 
Destroy the evil thought, the bad thought, the 
angry thought! […] Destroy all evil, destroy all 
enemies, destroy all obstacles, destroy all dis-
eases, destroy all illnesses, destroy all Vināyakas, 
48. Boechari 1982: 92–94; Anom 2005: 151; Hudaya 
Kandahjaya 2009: 2; Lokesh Chandra 2013: 233; Griffiths 
2014b: 1–3.
49. Griffiths 2014b: 5. For detailed pictures of the foil, see 
Griffiths 2014b: 7–14.
50. Ibid.: 3–4.
51. Ibid.: 5.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   102 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 111] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains103
destroy all those who have bad words, destroy 
all those who have bad thoughts, destroy the 
Devas, Asuras, Garuḍas, Gandharvas, Yakṣas, 
Kiṁnaras, Great Serpents, etc. […]! 
Fierce one, fierce one! Kill, kill! Tear, tear! Slay, 
slay! […] Hail!
[2.] Homage to the Triple Jewel! Homage to the 
fierce Vajrapāṇi, the great general of the Yakṣas! 
[It is] like this:
[…] Slay, slay! Shake! Crush! Agitate! Destroy! 
Annihilate! […] Hail!
So also like this:
Ṭaki hūṁ jaḥ jaḥ hūṁ kiṭa hūṁ ṭaki dhuṁ kiṭa 
dhuṁ iya ija ... Hail!52
Griffiths noted that the inscription is composed 
of two distinct but related texts, both relying on 
a variety of terminological and mantric elements 
‘characteristic of the cycle of the Sarvatathāga -
ta-tattvasaṃgraha’, and both consisting of an 
opening invocation addressed to the Three 
Jewels and to Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, a fierce form of 
Vajrapāṇi described as ‘the great general of the 
Yakṣas’ (mahāyakṣasenāpati), followed by a 
dhāraṇī. The first and primary dhāraṇī, called 
‘Greatly Ferocious Spell’, is made of ‘an opening 
invocation, followed by an extended invocation 
enumerating the attributes of the deity being 
invoked, i.e., Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, followed by a per-
formative statement of the title and purpose of 
the dhāraṇī and finally the text of the dhāraṇī  
proper’.53 The second dhāraṇī comprises a simple 
invocation addressed to the same deity, followed 
by a sequence of mantras with many imperatives 
and several untranslatable syllables.54
As discovered by Hudaya Kandahjaya, the first 
dhāraṇī reveals extensive correspondence with 
verses preserved in a Balinese stuti known as the 
Navakampa, or ‘The Ninefold Tremble’, nowa -
days recited in Bali during both daily rituals and 
52. Ibid.: 27–28.
53. Ibid.: 28–29.
54. Ibid.: 28–29.death rituals.55 Considering that in the Navakam-
pa the verses corresponding to the first dhāraṇī  
are followed by a sprinkling formula, Griffiths 
argues that it is possible that the second dhāraṇī  
of our bronze-foil once served an analogous ritual 
function.56
The fierce form of Vajrapāṇi to whom the 
dhāraṇīs are dedicated, according to Griffiths, 
should be identified as Trailokyavijaya, even if 
a damage in correspondence of the first line of 
the composition prevent us from determining 
with certainty the mudrā and the number of faces 
assigned to the deity. The number of arms, however, 
is explicitly four, although the text apparently lists 
more attributes than could be accommodated 
in four hands: sword, club, axe, snare, vajra.57 
The position of the subjugated deities is reversed 
from usual: Śiva is said to be trampled with 
the right foot, and Pārvatī with the left foot, as 
prescribed in Ritual Procedure for Recitation to the 
Wrathful Vidyārāja Trailokyavijaya ( Jiangsanshi 
fennu mingwang niansong yigui, 降三世忿怒明王
念誦儀軌 ), a work attributed to Amoghavajra,58 
and as represented in the Vāgīśvara Mañjuśrī 
Dharmadhātu maṇḍala in Alchi’s Dukhang 
(Fig. 6.7). The overall description of the deity 
deviates from any iconographic form attested so 
far: it could certainly be the consequence of a 
mistake, but we cannot exclude the hypothesis 
55. Kandahjaya 2009: 2–5.
56. Griffiths 2014b: 29–30. That said, Griffiths admits  
that he was not able to figure out how and when this sprin-
kling formula would have been employed in a ritual setting 
(ibid.: 30).
57. Griffiths 2014b: 31–32. In any case, Griffiths notes 
that the expression employed here (asimusalaparaśupāśa) 
corresponds to ‘a fixed set of attributes assigned to wrathful 
figures in more than one Buddhist scripture’ (Griffiths 
2014b: 18). 
58.  T 1210 041b11–12. In Japan, the ritual manuals of the 
Chūin lineage of the Shingon school, probably on the basis 
of this scripture, recommend the practitioner to visualize 
Trailokyavijaya with the right foot over Śiva and the left  
foot over his consort (Ōyama 2017: 429–430), in apparent 
contrast with the usual iconography, which nonetheless con -
tinued to be followed by Japanese artists in the production 
of icons. This should make us aware of the fact that there 
might always be a disjunction, even a lasting disjunction, 
between visualized and tangible iconographies. 
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   103 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 112] ---
Michel Gauvain104
that the inscription is referring to an unknown 
iconographic variant.59
Griffiths believes that the bronze-foil may have 
had a protective function, even if it is unclear if it 
was devised as an amulet for personal use, or as a 
relic to be installed into an architectural context.60 
However, it is also possible that it was part of con-
secration materials inserted into a metal image,61 
as in the case of the rolled-up silver foil that was 
found hidden in the base of the largest sculpture of 
the Sambas hoard (h. 18 cm), now preserved at the 
British Museum (1956,0725.8.b).62 The size of the 
Sambas rolled foil is about 16 × 2.35 cm, while the 
size of the bronze foil unearthed nearby the Boro-
budur is 45.5 × 2.3 cm:63 the virtually identical height 
of the two foils might be a clue to their similar use.
Five inscribed boundary stones, and a plaster 
cast
Five short inscriptions on boundary stones (vatu 
sīma) discovered in Central Java report the mantra 
Paki hūṃ jaḥ, which looks quite similar to the 
sequence ṭaki hūṃ jaḥ found at the opening of  
59.  Griffiths 2014b: 32. See also Lokesh Chandra 1999: 
1453–1460, 3632–3658.
60. Griffiths 2014b: 28.
61. Mathilde Mechling recently conducted a technical 
study on thirty-nine Indonesian bronze statues in the col-
lection of the Musée Guimet, supposedly crafted between 
the 8th and the mid-10th century, as part of her PhD re -
search project (Leiden University and Université Sorbonne 
Nouvelle Paris 3). She demonstrated that all the pieces in 
the corpus under investigation, although solid cast, were 
produced with a hollow space on the bottom of their sup-
porting elements (lotus flower or cushion, and quadrangular 
pedestal when still in place), and that this internal cavity, in 
some cases going further up into the legs or the abdomen of 
the deity, was specifically devised for inserting a consecra-
tion deposit after casting. By means of neutron radiography 
and tomography (see Lehman and Hartmann 2010 and Lang 
and Middleton 2005), she was also able to identify most of 
the contents of the four figurines which were still sealed up: 
along with other materials, such as gold or silver coins and 
stone beads, three statues out of four resulted to contain a 
rolled-up metal foil (Mechling 2018).
62. For detailed pictures of the silver foil, see Griffiths 
2014a: 144–145.
63. Griffiths 2014a: 142, and 2014b: 5.the last verse of the inscription on bronze foil ex-
amined above:
•  Inscription of Candi Abang, on a cylindrical 
stone apparently found in a Śaiva cave-shrine 
located at the foot of the hill on which the 
remains of Candi Abang are situated, in the 
area of Yogyakarta. Estampage 2739. Dated 
Śaka 794 (872 CE).64 
•  Inscription of Vihāra I, on a stone post found 
in Pleret, Bantul Regency, in the region of 
Yogyakarta. Stored in Yogyakarta BP3 Office 
(BG.323). Dated Śaka 796 (874 CE).65 
•  Inscription of Vihāra II, on a stone post  
found in Pleret, Bantul Regency, in the region 
of Yogyakarta. Stored in Yogyakarta BP3 
Office (BG.774). Dated Śaka 796 (874 CE).66
•  Inscription of Candi Bongkol (Temanggu -
ng), a.k.a. Inscription of Alih Tiṅhal, on a 
stone post from the homonymous Śaiva shrine, in Kedu district, and now in the 
National Museum of Indonesia, Jakarta 
 
64. The inscription of Candi Abang mentions exclusively 
the date. According to Stutterheim (1932: 293–294), this 
cylindrical stone, 68 cm high, for 42 cm round and for 26 cm square, was found by Mr. D. Honig, administrator of 
the Wanudjojo company, in July 1932. See also Damais 1955: 
29–30; Sarkar 1971: 183; Acri 2016b: 334, and Yamasaki 2018: 
attached list 1d. Wisseman Christie 2000: 79.
65. The inscription of Vihāra I only mentions a (Buddhist?) 
vihāra, and the date. Stutterheim (1932: 296) claims that this 
stone post was at that time ‘located in the yard of the mosque 
of the Kérta desa (near Kuta Gëde)’. See also Damais 1955: 
30, 236; Herni Pramastuti et al. 2007: 35; Acri 2016b: 334; 
Yamasaki 2018: attached list 1e.
66. The inscription of Vihāra II was found in the same area 
of Vihāra I, and shares with it the date and the reference to 
the vihāra. See Herni Pramastuti et al. 2007: 37; Yamasaki 
2018: attached list 1e. The two inscriptions of Vihāra have 
been apparently discussed by Rita Margaretha Setianingsih 
in a presentation titled ‘Agama Budha Abad 9 M di daerah 
Berbah – Yogyakarta. Berdasarkan data prasasti dan arca’ 
(‘9th Century Buddhism in Berbah – Yogyakarta. Based 
on data from inscriptions and statues’), delivered at the 
congress of the Indonesian Epigraphist Association (AAEI—
Asosiasi Ahli Epigrafi Indonesia) held in Malang in May 
2001. The proceedings of the congress were published in a 
volume that I was not able to consult: Asosiasi Ahli Epigrafi 
Indonesia (ed.), Buku Panduan Kongres I dan Seminar Aso -
siasi Epigrafi Indonesia – Malang, 28–30 Mei 2001: Aksara 
dan Makna: Membaca dan Mengungkap Kearifan Masa 
Llau (Jakarta: AAEI, 2001).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   104 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 113] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains105
(D. 83). Undated, but assigned to circa 883 
CE by Damais.67
•  Paki hūṃ jaḥ inscription, on a stone post pos -
sibly from Central Java. Estampage 2996, now 
missing. Dated or assigned to 872–874 CE.68
Griffiths suggested that Stutterheim, Damais, and 
other scholars who transcribed the mantra en -
graved on these boundary stones as Paki hūṃ jaḥ  
might have done so because they were ‘unfamiliar 
with this kind of mantric syllables’, and claimed 
that ‘it is safe to assume that ṭa ki is intended’.69 
While I believe that dismissing the paki reading, 
offered unanimously by early and contemporary 
scholars alike, as a mere case of ṭ/p misreading 
(without providing any further explanation apart 
from noticing that this kind of misreading is 
common in the works of early scholars) risks to 
overshadow some unclear and possibly peculiar 
aspects related to these inscriptions, I agree that 
the two mantras, Paki hūṃ jaḥ and Ṭaki hūṃ jaḥ, 
are probably analogous in their functions, and I 
will follow this assumption in the present chapter, 
in the hope that further research will cast some 
light upon potential differences between the two.70
The sequence ṭakī hūṃ jaḥ recalls a specific 
part of the myth of the subjugation of Maheśvara 
as presented in the STTS: Vairocana recites the 
mantra Hūṃ ṭakki jaḥ to summon Maheśvara 
and his retinue on the summit of Mount Sumeru, 
thus opening the way to his altercation with 
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya and his final sub -
jugation.71 In Davidson’s translation from the  
67. The inscription of Candi Bongkol just refers that a king 
(dasama rake, that could indicate the tenth king, maybe 
King Dakṣa) made certain gifts. See Stutterheim 1932: 294; 
Damais 1970: 49; Sarkar 1972: 289; Acri 2016b: 334; Yamasaki 
2018: attached list 1d. Wisseman Christie 2000: 80.
68. Yamasaki 2018: attached list 1d. Transliteration in Wis -
seman Christie 2000: 81.
69. Griffiths 2014a: 177.
70. That the two mantras are distinct but related, or else, 
interchangeable, is suggested by the existence of a plaster 
cast (discussed below) reporting them as part of two con-
secutive mantras, in which the syllables pa and ṭa appear 
quite distinguishable (I thank Jeffrey Sundberg for pointing 
out this detail in an email dated 9 June 2018). 
71. Davidson 1995: 551. Acri (2016b: 336) claims that the 
means of summoning the gods to Mount Sumeru was 
actually (Oṃ)  ṭakki jaḥ and not Hūṃ ṭakki jaḥ, but all Sanskrit edition of the STTS, the formula is called 
‘the elephant-goad of the pledge of all tathāgatas’, 
while in Iyanaga’s translation from the Chinese 
edition, it is defined as a formula of ‘convoca -
tion’, a term which stands for the Chinese gouzhao   
(鉤召 ), ‘hooking and catching’, which is used to 
indicate a ritual action in which the practitioner 
captures the deities and places them at his dispos -
al.72 The character gou ( 鉤) is commonly employed 
to indicate the elephant-goad (aṅkuśa).73
While the sequences ṭaki hūṃ jaḥ and hūṃ 
takki jaḥ are indeed similar, they are not identical. 
As noted by Griffiths, the former appears as such 
in the mantra Oṃ ṭakki hūṃ ja ḥ, which is found in 
the Sarvavajrodaya  (D2516/P3339), a ritual manual 
based on the first chapter of the STTS, composed 
by the Māgadha scholar Ānandagarbha (8th or 9th 
century),74 and in the Guhyasamājatantra, where  
it is described as ‘the great wrath of all Tathāgatas 
who is [named] Ṭakkirāja’.75 
three versions—ṭakki jaḥ, hūṃ ṭakki jjaḥ, and oṃ ṭakki 
jjaḥ—occur in the STTS (662, 927, 1129 in Horiuchi’s 
edition). Tucci gives Hūṃ tat kij jaḥ (1932: 140), Snellgrove 
Hūṃ ṭakkijjaḥ (1987: 136), and Davidson Hūṃ takki jaḥ   
(1995: 551).
72. Iyanaga 1985: 669.
73. Nakamura 1981: 398d.
74. The dates of Ānandagarbha are not clear. What is sure 
is that he lived before the 10th century. Buswell and Lopez 
place him in the mid-8th century (2014: 781). The Tibetan 
monk-historian Tāranātha (16th–17th century) places his 
life during the reign of King Mahīpāla, who apparently 
died in the same year as the Tibetan King Ral pa can (836 
CE). In any case, it seems that Ānandagarbha studied at 
Vikramaśīla, and that his teacher was Vajravarman from 
Siṅhala (Sri Lanka) (Skorupski 1983: XXV).
75. Griffiths 2014a: 177–178. In Japan, Ṭakkirāja (Takki-ō, 
摘枳王 , 樀枳王 , 擿枳王  or 吒枳王 ) is a deity associated with 
the same mantra, variously identified with Trailokyavijaya 
(降三世 ), Vajrarāja/Rāgarāja ( 金剛王 /愛染王 , Vajrarāja 
being also known as ‘Vajra hook king’ 金剛鉤王 ), or as 
the just judge, King Yama ( 閻摩王 ). Otherwise, Ṭakkirāja 
is sometimes considered as a name for the wrathful body of 
all the deities ( 諸尊の忿怒身の名 ) (Mikkyō Jiten Hensankai 
2007: 1552). In the Shingon Jiten, mantras with the sequence 
ṭakki  are listed from number 286 to 291, and ( Oṃ) ṭakki hūṃ 
jjaḥ (n. 290) is reported as the mantra of Vajrarāja ( 金剛王 ) 
as found in Sword Seals of the Great Sun Tathāgata (Dari 
rulai jianyin, 大日如來劍印 ; T 864A 196c04–6, transliterated 
as 唵吒計吽惹 ) (Hatta 1985: 48–49). 
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   105 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 114] ---
Michel Gauvain106
The function of this mantra appears in any 
case to be consistent with the function of the  
Hūṃ ṭakki jaḥ in the STTS. Its purpose, in fact, is 
that of ‘violent abduction’ of ‘obstacles’, a first step 
that is usually conducive to their ritual annihilation. 
As we read in the Sarvavajrodaya, the abduction  
of ‘obstacles’ is achieved also through the mimesis 
of the acts of Trailokyavijaya on part of the  
officiant:
He who wishes to effect complete freedom from 
obstacles should cover them (i.e. the effigies 
of the directional deities who might cause 
trouble) with mud. If in this condition they 
[still] make trouble, he should immerse himself 
in [the deity] Vajrahūṁkāra [Trailokyavijaya] 
and adduct them with the Ṭakkirāja [that is 
to say, the mantra Oṁ ṭakki hūṁ jaḥ]; should 
also adduct them etc. with the Vajra-goads 
etc.; should bind the [seal of] Vajrahūṃkara; 
and should step on the effigy of the obstacle 
with his left foot. After the practice of [self-]
expansion with Hūṁ vaṁ hūṁ etc., he should 
stand in pratyālīḍha stance, should throw 
that seal in the direction of the clouds etc., in 
between each of them, and should visualize 
that the clouds etc. are being burnt to ashes by 
Vajrahūṃkara who shines like dense blazing 
fire expanding high in the sky and strikes [the 
obstacles] with his foot. In this way, they are 
struck down.76
In the case of the five inscriptions on boundary 
stones listed above, however, it is likely that the 
formula Paki hūṃ jaḥ was intended by itself to 
bring about the removal of obstacles. This is sug-
gested by the fact that the formula is engraved at 
the very beginning of the inscriptions, where it is 
not uncommon to find the propitiatory formula 
avighnam astu (‘let there be no obstacles!’).77 
A possible explanation for this could come 
from the examination of a plaster cast preserved 
in the National Museum of Ethnology in Leiden 
(RV-1403-2996), which provides us with a unique 
example of Javanese inscription apparently dis -
playing both the sequences paki hūṃ jaḥ and ṭaki 
76. Griffiths 2014a: 178.
77. Ibid.: 178; Acri 2016b: 334.hūṃ jaḥ.78 According to Juynboll, this plaster cast 
(11.5 × 75 × 5 cm) reproduces a section of a memori -
al stone or slab (95 × 167.5 × 74.5 cm), characterized 
by Kawi-script lettering in the shape of an arch 
on the front surface, which was recovered on the 
terrain of Prambanan, in the region of Yogyakar-
ta.79 The inscription is undated, but was probably 
carved in the 9th century.80 It seemingly reports, 
consecutively, the mantras Paki hūṃ jaḥ jaḥ hūṃ 
vaho and Ṭaki hūṃ jaḥ jaḥ hūṃ vaho,81 with the 
sequence jaḥ hūṃ vaho that may be reconstituted 
as jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ, ‘a very strong unit in Bud-
dhist tantras’, as suggested by Griffiths.82 
Griffiths was not able to find a scriptural source 
for the mantra Ṭaki hūṃ jaḥ jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ 
(even though he traced a similar but not iden -
tical formula, Oṁ tạkki jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ, in a 
section on the consecration of the tantric master 
included in the Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā, a formula 
later traced by Iain Sinclair in a section on the 
devatāyoga from the Kriyāsaṅgraha), nor was able 
to explain the function of the inscription, given the lack of context.
83
However, as noted by Acri, the mantra Ṭaki hūṃ 
jaḥ jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ reflects a series of ritual steps, 
which are implied in the passage from the Sarvav-
ajrodaya quoted above:84 the text, in fact, instructs 
the practitioner to recite the Ṭakkirāja formula, 
and then to ‘adduct them etc. with the Vajra-goads 
etc.’.85 Anyone familiar with the system of the 
STTS would recognize here a reference to the four 
actions of adducting, drawing to oneself, snaring, 
78. A picture of the plaster cast can be downloaded from 
the website hosting the online collection database of the 
Nationaal Museum van Wereldculturen (https://hdl.handle.
net/20.500.11840/704989).
79. See Leemans 1885: 111, n. A32 and Juynboll 1909: 234. 
Juynboll adds that the cast was produced in July 1884, and 
that it was donated to Leiden’s National Museum of Eth-
nology by the Royal Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences 
(Juynboll 1909: XI). 
80. Damais 1955: 29–30; Acri 2016b: 336.
81. Jeffrey Sundberg, personal communication, 9 June 
2018.
82. Griffiths 2014a: 179.
83. Ibid.: 179–180. Acri 2016b: 336.
84. Acri 2016b: 334.
85. Griffiths 2014a: 178.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   106 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 115] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains107
and ‘penetrating’ or ‘bringing under control’, which 
are respectively symbolized by an elephant-goad, 
a rope, a chain, and a bell. These four actions are 
personified as Vajrāṅkuśa, Vajrapāśa, Vajrasphoṭa, 
and Vajrāveśa or Vajraghaṇṭā (the four Gathering 
Bodhisattvas who sit at the east, south, west, and 
north gate of the Vajradhātu), whose seed-syllables 
are precisely jaḥ, hūṃ, vaṃ, and hoḥ.86 
In the ritual context, the four actions have a 
two-directional application. On the one hand, 
they can be used to summon and bring into pres-
ence buddhas, bodhisattvas, and gods, calling 
them down from their transcendental abodes: in 
Shingon manuals for the ritual of the Vajradhātu, 
for instance, the four actions, enacted by utter -
ing the corresponding syllables while performing 
four variations of the trailokyavijaya-mudrā,87 are 
employed ‘to draw in and empower the retinue of 
Buddhas in the Great Mandala. The hook assem-
bles them, the snare enters them into the Great 
Mandala, the chain binds them there and the bell 
gives them great pleasure’.88 On the other hand, 
the four actions can be used to draw beings from 
their evil ways into the maṇḍala: an act of subjuga-
tion and conversion.89 As noted by Iyanaga, these 
kinds of evocatory procedures can be employed 
to summon and use at one’s wish the great devas, 
Maheśvara in primis.90 
As the jaḥ in the sequence ṭaki hūṃ jaḥ has 
essentially the same function of the jaḥ in the se-
quence jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ (attraction), it seems 
reasonable that the second jaḥ might have become 
considered redundant and omittable, and this 
would explain its absence in the mantra Oṁ tạkki  
 
86. Snellgrove 1987: 222–223; Snodgrass 1988: 629–633; 
Goepper 1993: 127. See Tanaka 2018: 131, fig. 4.10.
87. Habukawa 2015: 177.
88. Miyata 1988: 70.
89. It is important to note that the maṇḍala is considered 
a field of power, a domain, and from here comes the idea of 
‘bringing under one’s control’ (see Davidson 2002: 131–144, 
150–152). As noted by Acri (2016b: 336), the final result, 
‘penetrating’ or ‘bringing under control’, embodied by the 
syllable hoḥ, ‘may be regarded as a violent act, as penetration 
implies “stabbing” (with bell, perhaps figuratively indicating 
a “mantric penetration” via the medium of sound)’.
90. Iyanaga 1983: 751.jaḥ hūṃ vaṃ hoḥ reported in the Kriyāsaṅgraha  
and the Kriyāsaṅgrahapañjikā. Further, according 
to later East Asian sources, the essence of the syl-
lables hūṃ, vaṃ, and hoḥ, at least in their exoteric 
interpretation, is encompassed by the syllable jaḥ .91 
If this interpretation reflects an earlier, widespread 
belief, then it is possible that the three syllables hūṃ, 
vaṃ, and hoḥ, even when they did not explicitly 
follow the formula Taki hūṃ jaḥ, were considered 
functionally implied. This would explain why the 
five inscriptions on boundary stones listed above 
would fulfil the whole sequence of actions, and 
not simply the first step of adduction of ‘obstacles’.
What these inscriptions essentially reveal is an 
intimate connection between Trailokyavijaya’s 
power of subjugation and the primary function 
of the boundary stones on which these formulas 
were engraved, that is to say, the establishment of 
sacred areas (sīma). The same tradition may have 
survived to this day in Shingon ritual manuals, 
where the procedure for establishing the bounda-
ries, known as kekkai (translation of sīma-bandha, 
結界 ), employed to create an area suitable for the 
ritual, is carried out by performing the mudrā  
and the mantra of Trailokyavijaya (Oṃ śumbha 
niśumbha hūṃ gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ gṛhṇāpaya hūṃ 
ānaya hoḥ bhagavan vajra hūṃ phaṭ),92 turning the 
mudrā three times to the left to remove obstruc-
tions, and then three times to the right to establish 
the sacred area.93
91. Vajrāṅkuśa (elephant-goad/jaḥ), Vajrapāśa (rope/hūṃ), 
Vajrasphoṭa (chain/vaṃ), and Vajrāveśa (bell/hoḥ ) corre -
spond, on an exoteric plane, to the so-called ‘four things 
of attraction’ (catvāri-saṅgraha-vastūni): giving of alms, 
loving speech, beneficial practices, adaptation of actions 
(Snodgrass 1988: 629). According to Snodgrass, ‘older texts 
say that she [Vajrāṅkuśa] corresponds to the giving of alms 
among the four things of attraction, but later texts say that 
she incorporates all the four things of attraction’ (Snodgrass 
1988: 631). Snodgrass also adds that ‘she is the firmness, 
strength and efficacy of Bodhicitta, which draws beings up 
from Saṃsāra to Nirvāṇa’ (Snodgrass 1988: 631).
92. Hatta no. 1561. ‘Oṃ, O Śumbha, O Niśumbha! Hūṃ! 
Seize, seize! Hūṃ! Obtain! Hūṃ! Lead! Hoḥ! O Lord,  
O Vajra, hūṃ phaṭ!’ (Dreitlein 2018: 29).
93. This procedure, according to Iyanaga (1983: 750–751), 
is based on a specific text attributed to Amoghavajra  
(T 1056).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   107 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 116] ---
Michel Gauvain108
An inscription on gold foil recovered from the 
Ratu Boko plateau
A gold-foil cut in the form of two connected di-
amond-shaped leaves, recalling a vajra, was un -
earthed sometime during or just after the Second 
World War near the western entrance-gate of 
the complex of the Ratu Boko, a site located on a 
hillock one kilometre south of the famous Pram-
banan temple complex in Central Java.94 Sadly, as 
noted by Sundberg, the foil ‘disappeared from all 
likely institutional repositories without a trace’.95 
Apparently, local inhabitants looted it from the 
archaeological archives of the field office at Pram-
banan, whose building had been damaged during 
the Dutch attack to Yogyakarta.96 All we have in 
our hands now is a hand-drawn facsimile by the 
archaeologist Soehamir.97 
Soehamir did not take note of the physical di-
mensions of the foil, but his facsimile is accurate 
enough to recognize on each leaf, both on the front 
and back side, the mantra Oṃ ṭakī hūṃ jaḥ svāhā, 
inscribed in Kawi script. Interestingly, the mantras 
on the reverse side of the foil present an oddity: 
in both cases, the grapheme ī  in the syllable kī is 
characterized by an exaggerated circular bubble, 
94. Sundberg 2003: 164; Jordaan and Colless 2004: 56. The 
Ratu Boko plateau was the site of the Abhayagirivihāra, a 
Śailendra monastery inhabited by Sinhalese monks coming 
from the renowned, homonymous monastery in Sri Lanka 
(see de Casparis 1961: 241–248; Le Bonheur 1971: 42; Sund-
berg 2016: 349). Soehamir’s record of the finding, reported 
in the journal of the Archaeological Service of the former 
Netherlands East Indies (Oudheidkundig Verslag 1950), is 
not very clear, but according to Jordaan and Colless (2004: 
60), the gold foil was probably found in the area in between 
the first gate and the ramp, rather than in the steps of the 
gate or ramp; also, it was apparently found loose, and not 
within a stone box (pripih), as customary in the case of 
foundation deposits. In consideration of this, Snellgrove 
suggested that the gold foil was more probably associated 
with a sculpture, rather than with a building (Sundberg 
2003: 178). To this, Jordaan and Colless (2004: 61) added that 
an apt icon would have been an image of Trailokyavijaya 
subjugating Maheśvara and his consort, for reasons that 
will become clear below.
95. Sundberg 2003: 164.
96. Sundberg 2016: 378–379.
97. The facsimile, published in Soehamir 1948 [1950: 36], 
is reproduced in Sundberg 2003: 165 and Acri 2016b: 324.within which we can read the words panarabvan  
and khanipas.98
It has been suggested that the word panarab-
van may be a reference to King Rakai Panaraban 
(r. 784–803), the third monarch in the Vanua 
Tәṅgah III list of kings, successor of Panaṅkaran (r. 
746–784).99 This hypothesis was supported, on the 
basis of phonetic and orthographic arguments, by 
Sundberg, who also highlighted the compatibility 
of this identification with the plausible dating of 
the inscription.100 Jordaan and Colless noted that 
Panaraban was most probably a Śaiva (although 
apparently not unfavourably disposed toward Bud -
dhism), and pointed out that given the association 
of the mantra with the myth of Trailokyavijaya, the 
intention of those who crafted the object, possibly 
the monks of the Abhayagirivihāra, could have 
been the mantric subjugation and conversion of 
Panaraban.101
This perspective was also embraced by Acri, 
who noticed that Śaiva and Buddhist sources 
related to subjugatory practices describe proce -
dures for connecting written mantras to the victims, 
for instance by including their names at the end 
of the formulas, by inserting their letters between 
the mantric syllables, and so on.102 On the basis of 
his in-depth analysis of the Śaiva materials, Acri 
was persuaded that the gold-foil at the Ratu Boko 
might be ‘a yantra of coercive magic’ in the context 
of a Bauddha-Śaiva polemic, reflected in the use of 
the mantra recalling the taming of Maheśvara by 
Trailokyavijaya.103 Following Jordaan and Colless,104 
he believes that the artefact might have been crafted 
by the monks of the Abhayagirivihāra to subjugate 
98. Sundberg 2003: 164–165; Jordaan and Colless  
2004: 56.
99. Kusen 1994; Jordaan and Colless 2004: 58.
100. Sundberg 2003: 176–177. Sundberg pointed out that 
the form of the ka in the syllable kī of the Ratu Boko mantra 
might be a clue to a relatively early date of the inscription, 
as ‘no datable occurrence of this can be found in Java later 
than the 792 AD inscription of Mañjuśrīgṛha’ (Sundberg 
2003: 166). 
101. Jordaan and Colless 2004: 60–62.
102. Acri 2016b: 331.
103. Ibid.: 331, 341.
104. Jordaan and Colless 2004: 61–62.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   108 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 117] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains109
or ‘spellbind’ the king, in a sort of re-enactment 
of Trailokyavijaya’s myth, in order to establish a 
coercive hold odyuver him and convert him from 
Śaivism to Buddhism.105
As for the mysterious word khanipas, Acri 
claims that it should correspond to a personal 
name: of king Panaraban himself (‘Panaraban’ is 
his Raka title), of another victim (someone of his 
entourage, such as a general, minister, or a family 
member), or of the person who wished to ‘spell-
bind’ the king to himself.106 Sundberg suggestively 
advanced the hypothesis that khanipas could cor-
respond to the name of the queen, a possibility that 
would reinforce the parallel with the myth of the 
subjugation of Maheśvara and Umā.107
To Sundberg’s early doubt, that the final svāhā  
is usually employed in a benedictory rather than 
hostile context,108 Acri answered that the Tantras 
present different systematizations, and that the 
svāhā ‘does not necessarily entail a benedictory 
nuance’.109 Griffiths even affirmed that the presence 
or absence of the closing svāhā in the mantra can 
be considered a ‘trivial difference’.110 Although this 
105. Acri 2016b: 343–344. Curiously enough, in the 
16th-century mytho-historical work Carita Parahyaṅan 
(‘Chronicle of the Deified Ancestors’), we find a dialogue 
in which Sañjaya, considered by the author as the father 
of Panaraban, addresses his alleged son by saying: ‘Hey 
child, change (from) my religion, because it scares people’ 
(Sundberg 2011: 151). In the Carita Parahyaṅan, the figure 
of Panaṅkaran does not appear, and thus Sañjaya is said 
to be Panaraban’s father. However, we know, from the 
Wanua Tengah III inscription mentioned above, that the 
power passed from Sañjaya to Panaṅkaran, and from him 
to Panaraban (Sundberg 2011: 153). Acri believes that this text ‘might have preserved a vague memory of a dramatic 
and far-reaching religious conversion, or even a religious 
conflict, linked to this king and his reign, predating the text 
itself of six or seven centuries’ (Acri 2016b: 344).
106. Acri 2016b: 346.
107. Sundberg 2003: 177. However, Sundberg more recently 
argued that khanipas could be a reference to ‘Baṅga’, a son 
of Panaraban. According to his hypothesis, the Ratu Boko 
mantra could have been instigated by Panaraban’s son Varak 
against his own father and his own brother (Sundberg 2016: 
378).
108. Sundberg 2003: 170, 178. 
109. For instance, in Mahīdara’s system the closing svāhā 
is associated to the act of subjugation (Acri 2016b: 332, 343).
110. Griffiths 2014a: 177, fn. 125.might certainly be true, I believe that this point 
needs further consideration.
In the Susiddhikarasūtra ( Suxidi jieluo jing,  
蘇悉地羯羅經 ; T 893), in the chapter on the charac -
teristics of mantras, it is stated: ‘If there are mantras 
which, although their words are few in number, 
have the word “ oṃ” at the beginning and have the 
word “svāhā” at the end, you should realize that 
[these] mantras are quickly able to accomplish the 
śāntika rite ( 扇底迦法 )’,111 that is to say, a rite for 
averting evil. We do not know if the people who 
crafted the Ratu Boko gold foil were following an 
analogous tantric system, but we already noticed, in 
the previous examples, how benedictory results can 
be reached through subjugatory means, i.e. through 
the annihilation of evil influences. In the case of 
the inscription on the lead-bronze foil, through 
the destructions of all Bhūtas and Gaṇas (that is 
to say, all obstacles), one obtains the ‘success of 
all undertakings’; in the case of the inscriptions 
on the boundary stones, by removing obstacles or 
by bringing them under control, one establishes 
an auspicious space, suitable for ritual practice. In 
short, subjugatory mantras can be employed to 
pursue benedictory ends, and in similar cases a 
final svāhā would not appear out of place. 
I myself was quite persuaded of the theory of the 
mantric subjugation and conversion of Panaraban, 
at least until I examined some Chinese canonical 
sources in search for instances of use of the Ṭak-
kirāja mantra. The Ṭakkirāja mantra is mentioned 
in the Vajraśekhara-yoga’s Very Highest and Secret 
Methods of Trailokyavijaya Siddhi ( Jin’gangding 
yuqie Jiangsanshi chengjiu jishen mimen, 金剛
頂瑜伽降三世成就極深密門 , T 1209),112 and is 
found in the Dhāraṇī of Leaf-clad Avalokiteśvara  
Bodhisattva ( Yeyi Guanzizai pusa tuoluoni, 葉衣
觀自在菩薩陀羅尼 ; T 1100), transliterated as 唵樀
枳吽弱 .113 Both these scriptures are attributed to 
Amoghavajra. In the latter text, apparently ‘trans-
lated’ by Amoghavajra between 756 and 763,114 the 
sequence ṭakki hūṃ jaḥ is also found embedded 
111. T 893 604c01–2. Giebel 2001: 134.
112. T 1209 040c10.
113. T 1100 448a20.
114. Kotyk 2017: 192.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   109 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 118] ---
Michel Gauvain110
in the mantras of the twenty-eight great generals 
of the yakṣas ( 二十八大藥叉將 ), which are all 
composed of an initial syllable oṃ ( 唵), followed 
by the name of the specific yakṣa general,115 the 
sequence ṭakki hūṃ jaḥ ( 吒抧吽弱 ), and a final 
svāhā (娑嚩訶 ).116
The context for the use of the mantras of the 
twenty-eight great generals of the yakṣas is given 
as follows: ‘Whether king, man or woman, [some] 
will be difficult to raise and nourish; some will have 
short lifespans, bound in illness and at unease with 
sleep and food. All is due to past karma and caus-
es-conditions, being born under a bad nakṣatra 
convergence. Some often have their natal nakṣatra  
intruded upon by the five planets, making their 
bodies uneasy’.117 ‘In that case’, says the text, ‘write 
the mantras of the twenty-eight great generals of 
the yakṣas on paper or on a white cloth, using 
bovine bile, and attach them on the walls of the 
residing place’: four on each of the walls in the 
cardinal directions; one on each of the corners in 
the intermediate directions; four on the floor in 
the cardinal directions (inscribed on the surface 
of some stones that should not be stepped on); 
four on the ceiling (or roof?) in the intermediate 
directions.118 ‘Once the mantras are attached, at the 
115. Cf. the names listed in Amoghavajra’s ‘translation’ of 
the Mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī sūtra, the Sūtra of the Mother of 
Buddhas, the Great Peahen Queen of Mantras (Fomu Da-
kongque mingwang jing, 佛母大孔雀明王經 ; T 982, 426b18–
427a22). In this text, the Buddha says to Ananda: ‘Further-
more, you should recite the names of the twenty-eight great 
generals of the yakṣas, for they are able to protect all sentient 
beings in all the worlds in the ten directions, preventing all 
misfortunes and calamities’ (T 982 426b18–20). The text 
then specifies that each of these great generals permanently 
resides in a specific quarter and protects sentient beings 
living there, freeing them from suffering and despair. Four 
are said to reside in each of the cardinal directions, one in 
each of the intermediate directions, four on land, and four 
in the sky (T 982 426b20–427a22).
116. T 1100, 448b11–449b08.
117. T 1100, 448b11–13. Kotyk 2017: 94. See also Kotyk 2018.
118.  T 1100, 448b13–449a28. A diagram of the prescribed 
positioning of the mantras, as well as their rendering in 
Siddham script, can be found in the Takushō ( 澤鈔 ; T 2488 
443b20–444b01), a work by Shukaku ( 守覺 ; 1150–1202).  
In this work, the author records the transmission he 
received from the Shingon monk Kakusei 覺成  (1126–1198) location of each of the twenty-eight great generals 
of the yakṣas, smear a small altar with incense, and 
over it burn incense and place various flowers, as 
well as drinks and food, a lamp, purified water, and 
in a sincere and devout way, commence by saying: 
“I politely request the twenty-eight great generals 
of the yakṣas and their retinues to abide each in 
his respective direction, to protect and defend 
[name of the person], eliminating misfortunes 
and anything inauspicious, sickness and the risk 
of premature death, allowing him to attain physical 
strength and increasing his sagaciousness, giving 
him awe-inspiring and beautiful appearance, and 
making him easy to raise and nourish, providing 
him with a very long life”. Once the empowerment 
is accomplished, the twenty-eight great generals of 
the yakṣas will not dare to be in contrast with [the 
will of] all the buddhas, and thus they will follow 
the commands of Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva and 
Vajrapāṇi Bodhisattva. Day and night, they will 
protect him firmly and allow him to be at ease while 
sleeping and while awake, recovering his majesty. If 
a king does so, calamities and diseases in his realm 
will be put to an end, the country will be peaceful, 
and the people will be happy’.119
So here we have an example of use of the 
mantra Oṃ ṭakki hūṃ jaḥ svāhā, virtually identical 
to the mantra of the Ratu Boko gold foil, employed 
for protection, cure and pacification, for the 
benefit of any person but more specifically of the 
king and consequently of the kingdom. In this 
case, with the insertion of the name of a yakṣa  
general after the initial oṃ, the corresponding 
being is apparently invited to protect a person 
from negative influences coming from a specific 
direction. The mantra itself, however, does not 
seem to be exclusively related to those twenty-
eight great generals of the yakṣas, but rather to 
a protective function which might be exercised, 
when unspecified, by all that class of beings in its 
entirety, or possibly by Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya 
as their lord and leader, the general among the 
great generals of the yakṣas.
of the Hojuin branch of the Hirosawa subschool (Hunter 
2018: 326).
119. T 1100 449a28–b09.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   110 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 119] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains111
This is not enough to dismiss the theory of 
the mantrical subjugation and conversion of 
Panaraban: the specificities of the occurrence of 
the mantra on the Ratu Boko gold foil, such as the 
nature of the words connected to the mantra or the 
method employed to connect them to the mantra, 
must be carefully considered, as they may be 
decisive to the nature of the mantra itself in relation 
to its intended beneficiary or victim. However, the 
use of gold for the mantra might point to a regal 
commission for a benediction, and if that is the 
case, then we might have to reconsider the reason 
behind the production of the piece and possibly 
see it as an evidence of Buddhist activities for the 
protection of the sovereign, and by extension of 
the state, in 8th-century Java.
Information from sculptural sources
If we think that in the whole Indian subcontinent, 
up to the 10th century, we can count no more 
than five images of Trailokyavijaya, the number 
of icons found in Java is relatively high. The five 
or possibly six surviving Javanese figurines are all 
in bronze, and none in stone, and this prevents us 
from reaching a better understanding of the cult 
of Trailokyavijaya in terms of time, space, and 
context. In fact, while stone images of deities have 
been produced on the island during the whole 
Hindu-Buddhist period (7th to the beginning of the 
16th century), Buddhist figurines in bronze were 
imported or manufactured in Java only until the 
early 11th century.120 Further, while stone images 
120. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 39. The reason 
behind the rather abrupt ceasing of the manufacturing of bronze figurines is unclear: it was not because of a lack of 
raw materials or of technical skills, as the production of 
other kinds of bronzes, such as ritual implements, lamps, 
bells, and other utensils, continued without interruption, 
and the late production, from the technical point of view, 
is often of a superior quality. It has been suggested that 
the demand of bronze statuettes of deities could have 
tapered off because of the diffusion of new approaches to 
religious practice, which dismissed the worship of images. 
This, however, would not explain why the production of 
stone statuary, on the other hand, was carried on until the 
end of the Hindu-Buddhist period. See Fontein 1990: 56; de 
Casparis 1991: 349–350; Klokke and Lunsingh Scheurleer 
1994: 5; Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 76–81.are heavy and not easily transportable, bronze figu -
rines are small in size, light and transportable, even 
for long distances, and thus the place where they 
were discovered does not necessarily correspond 
to the area where they were manufactured,121 nor 
to the place where they were used: many statuettes 
of this kind were found assembled in metal boxes or in earthenware jars, buried in the proximity of 
temples for reasons that are still unclear.122 To this, 
it should be added that while many stone images 
were found in situ, where a whole architectural 
and iconographical project offers clues to the rel-
ative position of the deity within the enshrined 
pantheon, a great number of bronze figurines 
were found outside of an archaeological context, 
often during agricultural works, and thus even 
the place of discovery is usually unknown.123 To 
these limitations we should add two considerations. 
First, it has been convincingly argued that bronze 
and stone statuary in Java had their own separate 
evolutions both in style and iconography.124 Second, 
the production of bronzes of large size is hardly 
known (we have only fragments of large images).125 
In consequence we must evaluate the importance 
of the cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java from smaller 
icons.126 Pending further discoveries, we must be 
content with an incomplete idea of the regional 
diffusion of the cult.
It is important to note that the lived context 
of the bronzes is unknown, and neither ancient 
literature nor later ritual manuals provide infor -
mation clarifying if they also served instrumental 
121. Mechling 2018: 71.
122. Mechling 2014: 26–27; Lunsingh Scheurleer and 
Klokke 1988: XII; Fontein 1971: 40, 43. Some scholars suggest 
that they were hidden away for their economic value, to keep 
them safe during troubled times (Lunsingh Scheurleer and 
Klokke 1988: 102), while others believe that they were buried 
for their sacred nature, possibly for ceremonial purposes 
(Fontein 1990: 38).
123. Mechling 2014: 26 and Mechling 2018: 72.
124. Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 85–88.
125. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 16–17; Fontein 
1971: 37–40, 75; Bernet Kempers 1959: pl. 44–45; Mechling 
2014: 26n8.
126. However, in the case of figurines belonging to 
maṇḍalas, size can be indicative of the rank of the repre-
sented deity within the hierarchy of the maṇḍalic assembly 
(Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 80).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   111 29/7/22   3:13 PM

--- [Page 120] ---
Michel Gauvain112
purposes.127 It has been suggested that they could 
have been used for private worship, placed on do-
mestic altars, but also in temples, in small niches,128 
requested by monks or royalty, especially in the 
case of maṇḍalic groups of statuettes.129 
An eight-armed Trailokyavijaya from the 
National Museum of Indonesia, Jakarta (655a)
The National Museum of Indonesia in Jakarta 
preserves an icon of Trailokyavijaya from the 
Kläring Collection,130 whose importance cannot 
be overestimated, as it is the only Javanese piece 
still displaying all its original attributes (Figs. 6.10 
and 6.11). It was transferred to the museum from 
Yogyakarta (Central Java) by 1884.131 This four-
faced, eight-armed Trailokyavijaya, 18.7 cm in 
height, has high, pointed headgear, a necklace, 
earrings, and three bracelets on each arm, a spiky 
flower-shaped armlet, and simple bracelets at the 
elbows and wrists. He wears a dhotī, so thin that 
it is almost undistinguishable from the body—
with its edges just visible at ankle level and the 
shallow folds dangling between the legs and under 
the right leg; from Isidore Kinsbergen’s photo -
graphs preserved at the Rijksmuseum (Figs. 6.10 
and 6.11), it appears to be decorated with floral 
roundels,  a pattern also found in the stone frag-
ment from Nālandā (Fig. 6.3) and in the bronze 
from Nālandā Site 9 (Fig. 6.4). He also wears a 
decorated cross-body band passing over the left  
shoulder, with one end falling almost vertically 
on his back. Apparently, two stripes of similar -
ly decorated cloth wrap his body at the level of 
the abdomen, with the ends hanging down on 
the front and back side of the image. Below the 
127. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 15, 17–18.
128. Van Lohuizen-de Leeuw 1984: 14; Lunsingh Scheurleer 
and Klokke 1988: 17; Lerner and Kossak 1991: 164; Mechling 
2014: 28.
129. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 15. For com-
parison, scholars long expressed sceptical views about the 
dissemination of Buddhist Vajrayānic beliefs linked to small 
bronze Hevajra maṇḍala icons found in Angkor, until later 
research indicated a 3.6 m stone Hevajra icon was erected 
in the main entrance to the Bayon state temple in c. 1200. 
See Sharrock 2022.
130. Koninklijk 1890: LXXII; With 1920: 151.
131. Linrothe 1992: 418.Fig. 6.10: Trailokyavijaya. Bronze, 18.7 cm, mid-10th 
century. National Museum of Indonesia, Jakarta, acc. 
no. 655a (Photo by Isidore van Kinsbergen, 1865. Ac -
cessed 13 September 2020. http://hdl.handle.net/10934/
RM0001.COLLECT.453733).
Fig. 6.11: Trailokyavijaya. Bronze, 18.7 cm, mid-10th 
century. National Museum of Indonesia, Jakarta, 
acc. no. 655a (Photo by Isidore van Kinsbergen, 
1865. Accessed 13 September 2020. http://hdl.handle.
net/10934/RM0001.COLLECT.453731). 
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   112 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 121] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains113
abdomen, visible on the rear, we find two belts, 
locked with a big flower-shaped buckle on the 
front side. A long sash is also tied around the hips. 
The deity stands in a very angular pratyālīḍha, and 
forms the usual trailokyavijaya-mudrā with the 
front hands, holding vajra and vajra-bell. In the 
rest of his right hands, he holds a short sword (top), 
a cakra (mid), and an arrow (low), while in the left 
hands he has a bow (top), an unidentified object, 
possibly a crescent shaped knife (mid),132 and an 
elephant-goad (low).133 To my knowledge, this 
specific set of implements is not found anywhere 
else than in Java. Trailokyavijaya’s right foot is 
over Umā’s breast, while his left foot is on the right 
side of the head of Maheśvara, which is turned by 
the blow. Both the trampled deities wear a high 
crown, earrings, sacred chord (upavīta), decorated 
bracelets on the arms, and simple bracelets on the 
wrists and ankles. Also, they hold vajras in both 
their hands, as noted in the Notulen of the Royal 
Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences (Koninklijk 
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Weten -
schappen, hereafter KBGKW): those in their right 
hands are three-pronged vajras, while those in 
their left hands are one-pronged vajras.134 The limp 
penis of Maheśvara lies on the belly of the consort. 
The interlaced position of their bodies recalls the 
stone image from Bodhgayā (Fig. 6.5). The pedestal 
consists of an oval double lotus with three legs (or 
four, according to With—there is no known image 
of the bottom of the sculpture).135 Thanks to Pleyte 
132. It might be a traditional knife, sickle, or machete 
from the Indonesian archipelago: an Arit (Java), a Korambi 
(Sumatra/Sulawesi), a Luki (Java), a Telabuna (Java), a 
magical Kudi (Java/Madura/Bali), or a Ruding Lengon 
(East Java). See Zonneveld 2001.
133. According to Pleyte (1902: 197), With (1920: 151), and 
the Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en 
Wetenschappen (1890: LXXII), he has an elephant-goad 
(‘olifantshaak’) in the mid-left hand, and a hook with a long 
handle (‘haak met langen steel’) in the low-left hand.
134. KBGKW (1890: LXXI). Cf. the stone Trailokyavijaya 
fragment from Nālandā (Fig. 6.3), where both the trampled 
deities appear to hold a vajra in the right hand and a triśūla  
in the left hand, and the bronze Trailokyavijaya from the 
Five Continents Museum in Munich (Fig. 6.12), where Ma -
heśvara alone holds a vajra in the left hand. 
135. With 1920: 151.and to the KBGKW, we know that on it there 
is an unpublished inscription in Old Javanese.136 
The piece is currently inaccessible, so I could not 
verify if it corresponds to the ye dharmā formula, 
or to any mantra employed for the consecration of 
icons.137 This is highly probable, however, as these 
are usually the only kind of inscriptions found on 
Javanese bronze images of deities.138
Stylistically, the icon presents the characteristics 
of a rather advanced stage in the so-called process 
of ‘Javanisation’.139 Although being a wrathful deity, 
Trailokyavijaya’s faces are all serene, and so are the 
faces of the heavenly couple under his feet: a typical 
characteristic of Javanese art.140 The large, prom-
inent eyes and the sharply pointed noses typical 
of the Pāla bronzes are replaced by more delicate 
facial features, something that happens already 
in the early production.141 The pointed headgear, 
136. Pleyte (1902: 197); KBGKW (1890: LXXII).
137. ‘The Tathāgata has proclaimed the cause, as well 
as the cessation, of all things arising from a cause. This is 
the Great Śramaṇa’s teaching’ (Ye dharmā hetuprabhavā 
hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato, hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃ 
vādī mahāśramaṇaḥ). See Bentor 1996 and Swearer 2004: 
219–220.
138. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: XII, 15.
139. The term ‘Javanisation’ is employed to refer to the 
continuous process of differentiation of the local production 
from the early imported models, a process of efflorescence 
and enhancement which began already before the mid-9th 
century (i.e. the artists introduced delicate facial features), 
led to the gradual birth of an original Javanese style between 
the mid-9th and the early 10th century (the so-called Central 
Javanese style: small and round faces, regular proportions, 
balanced shapes, rounded limbs, minimal moulding of the 
traits), and then evolved further, with the gradual but rapid 
emergence of some specific characteristics which led to the 
establishment of the so-called East Javanese style (i.e. elon-
gation of the bodies, increase of the height of the headgears, 
ornaments more dense and protuberant, expansion of the set 
of jewellery—with the introduction of a third bracelet), the 
latter reaching its apex in the late 10th or early 11th century 
(i.e. very slender and elongated bodies, slightly moulded 
and dominated by enriched ornamentation: high pointed 
headgears, full set of spiky jewellery, and peculiar curls on 
the shoulders). See Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988; 
Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994.
140. Fontein 1990: 158; Linrothe 1992: 419–420.
141. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 29; Huntington 
1994: 65–66; Klokke and Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 5.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   113 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 122] ---
Michel Gauvain114
slightly increased in height, the use of a set of three 
bracelets, and above all the moderately dense or-
namentation, are typical of Javanese production of 
the mid-10th century: later images have a denser 
ornamentation, and those manufactured in the 
last quarter of the 10th century usually present 
long, bodhisattva-style hair curling up from the 
shoulders.142 For these reasons, in contrast with 
Linrothe, who dates this piece to the late 10th 
century, I suggest that the period of production 
corresponds to the mid-10th century.143 
An eight-armed Trailokyavijaya from the  
Five Continents Museum, Munich (30-1-9)
After being listed in Juynboll’s catalogue of Leiden’s 
National Museum of Ethnology in 1909, under the 
number 1630/5, this image of Trailokyavijaya, to 
my knowledge, has been completely ignored by 
old and recent scholarship alike, probably because 
in 1930 it was transferred to the Bavarian State 
Museum of Ethnology in Munich (the present-day 
Five Continents Museum, München), and there 
remained almost forgotten (Fig. 6.12). According 
to Juynboll, who only provides a very brief and 
incomplete description, the statuette comes from 
Yogyakarta (Central Java), and its height is 23 cm.144 
142. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 33. See, for 
instance, the figurines belonging to the Nganjuk and Sur-
ocolo maṇḍalas (Bernet Kempers 1959: pl. 168–171; Fontein 
1971: 79–81; Fontein 1990: 223–233; Lerner and Kossak 1991: 
198–201; Eka Hadiyanta 2011: 41–59).
143. Linrothe (1992: 420) essentially acknowledges the 
fact that this sculpture had undergone a more advanced 
process of Javanisation than the statuette in London, and 
as he placed the statuette in London in ca. mid-10th century, 
he deduced that the statuette in Jakarta should be of the 
late 10th century. I did the reverse: I placed the statuette 
in Jakarta in the mid-10th century on the basis of its own 
characteristics, and then I dated the statuette in London a 
bit earlier, for it shows a less advanced process of Javani-
sation. The point is that at the present it is relatively easy 
to establish a relative chronology of the figurines, while a 
precise dating remains a mirage (Lunsingh Scheurleer and 
Klokke 1988: 23).
144. Juynboll 1909: 94. Juynboll affirms that the figurine 
was acquired by Leiden’s National Museum of Ethnology 
in November 1907. He adds the following reference: ‘Cat. 
SCHULMAN, pag. 72. n°. 792’.The deity has a high pointed headgear, a necklace, 
spiky flower-shaped earrings and armlets, two 
additional striped bracelets on each arm (at the 
elbows and wrists), and striped anklets. He wears a 
dhotī decorated with floral roundels, and a sacred 
chord passing over the left shoulder, with one end 
falling vertically behind it. Apparently, a belt and 
a striped cloth wrap his body at the level of the 
abdomen, with their ends hanging down on the 
front, in a rather unnatural manner, from above a 
big and spiky flower-shaped buckle. The ends of a 
long sash, or of two separated sashes, hang down 
on the sides, from the level of the belt, and fall 
along the hips. The garments fill most of the space 
between the legs. Instead of forming the classical 
trailokyavijaya-mudrā, the four-faced deity holds 
a vajra-bell at the level of the chest with both the 
frontal hands, in a rather unusual manner. The 
Fig. 6.12: Trailokyavijaya. Bronze, 23 cm, late 10th 
century. Five Continents Museum, Munich, acc. no. 
30-1-9 © Museum Fünf Kontinente, Munich (Photo: 
Marietta Weidner).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   114 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 123] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains115
attributes held in the top and mid-right hands 
are now lost, but looking at the picture published 
in Leiden’s catalogue in 1909 (Fig. 6.13) we realize 
that at that time they were still at their place. The 
overall iconography of this piece is virtually iden-
tical with that of the eight-armed Trailokyavijaya 
in Jakarta, apart from the strange mudrā in front 
of the chest: a short sword (top), a cakra (mid), 
and an arrow (low) in the right hands, and a bow 
(top), the unidentified object looking like a crescent 
shaped knife (mid), and an elephant-goad (low) in 
the left hands.145 Even in this case, the deity stands 
in pratyālīḍha, but the posture is less angular than 
145. According to Juynboll (1909: 94), he has an ele -
phant-goad (‘elefantenhaken’) in the mid-left hand, and a 
hook with a long handle (‘haken mit langem stiel’) in the 
low-left hand.that of the piece in Jakarta. His right foot is over 
Umā’s breast, while his left foot is on the right 
side of the head of Maheśvara, turned as to avoid 
the blow. As in the piece in Jakarta, the trampled 
deities wear a high crown, earrings, sacred chord, 
decorated bracelets on the arms, and simple brace -
lets on the wrists and ankles. Maheśvara holds a 
vajra in his left hand, while his right hand seems 
to have a hole, which could have hosted another 
attribute. Umā appears sustaining her own head 
with her left hand, while with the right seems to 
touch the erect penis of her consort. Their inter-
laced posture, again, recalls the stone image from 
Bodhgayā (Fig. 6.5). The couple lies on an oval, 
four-legged double-lotus pedestal.
Stylistically, the piece appears slightly later than 
the one in Jakarta, as the ornamentation, on the 
whole, appears more spiky, dense and protuberant, 
and the faces, even in this case delicate and serene, 
look more elongated. However, like in the case of 
the figurine in Jakarta, this Trailokyavijaya lacks 
the peculiar curls on the shoulders, typical of the 
production of the last quarter of the 10th century.146 
For these reasons, I suggest that this piece should 
have been manufactured during the third quarter 
of the 10th century.
An eight-armed Trailokyavijaya from The 
British Museum, London (1859,1228.94)
This four-faced, eight-armed Trailokyavijaya 
(Fig. 6.14), according to the record of The British 
Museum, measures 14.5 cm in height, and was 
found near Mount Prau, or Dieng, in Central 
Java. In the acquisition entry, the sculpture is 
dated to the 9th–10th century. In this sculpture, 
Trailokyavijaya has a high, pointed, spiky headgear, 
a very loose necklace, flower-like earrings, and 
only two bracelets on each arm: a small, spiky, 
flower-shaped armlet, and a simple bracelet at 
the wrists. He wears a short, plain dhotī, and no 
cross-body sash. Apparently, two belts wrap his 
body at the level of the abdomen, with the lower 
one locked with a big flower-shaped buckle. A 
146. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 33. See fns. 138 
and 141.
Fig. 6.13: Trailokyavijaya. Bronze, 23 cm, late 10th 
century. Five Continents Museum, Munich, acc. no. 
30-1-9 (Juynboll 1909, pl. XIII).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   115 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 124] ---
Michel Gauvain116
V-shaped section of fabric, possibly part of the 
dhotī, hangs on the front of the image, reaching his 
right ankle, with an additional stripe falling down 
on the back side. A long sash is tied around the 
hips, forming large bows on the sides: its two ends 
fall almost vertically on the back side of the image, 
nearly reaching the ground. The deity forms the 
classical trailokyavijaya-mudrā with the frontal 
hands, while holding a vajra and a vajra-bell. All 
the other attributes are lost, but the lower part of 
the hilt of a sword is still visible below the hand 
of the top-right arm. For the rest, the pictures 
of the icon published thus far are of no use in 
understanding the original iconography: the other 
two right hands, as suggested by Linrothe, look 
like a repeated threatening tarjanī-mudrā (closed 
fist with extended index finger) with the extended 
fingers unnaturally bent (sideways in the case of 
the hand of the middle arm, and backwards in 
the case of the hand of the lower arm).147 All the 
remaining left hands look like closed fists, even if 
it is clear that they must have held attributes, later 
broken, judging from the remaining fragments 
of such attributes. The visual examination of the 
147. Linrothe 1992: 417.figurine at the museum revealed that the hand of 
the middle right arm has a hole for an implement, 
and therefore cannot be in tarjanī-mudrā, despite 
the extended index finger. The hand of the lower 
right arm, on the contrary, does not seem to have 
a hole for an attribute.148 The bit sticking out from 
the fist, however, is definitely not a broken imple-
ment, but the index finger, and this might imply 
the tarjanī-mudrā, as suggested by Linrothe.149 
Concerning the remaining left hands, the lowest 
one has a hole for an implement (with a peculiar 
space between the index finger and the hole itself, 
maybe used to fix the attribute), while the mid and 
top ones are clearly holding some broken attribute, 
nearly impossible to identify. 
It is reasonable to assume that the deity had at 
least an arrow in a right hand, and a bow in a left  
hand, as these appear to be constant elements in 
Trailokyavijaya’s iconography. Apparently, the 
only right hand which could have held an arrow 
is that of the middle arm, which has a hole for an 
attribute. The hole is shaped in a way that would 
allow the arrow to be held reclined towards the 
deity’s head. It is to be noted that this hand is kept 
quite raised, and if we look at the examples from 
Jakarta and Munich, the hand holding the arrow, 
in those cases the lower right, is analogously kept 
raised, although with the palm directed inward, 
towards the deity’s face, instead of outward. I 
suspect that this slight change in the posture of 
the deity could have been concomitant with an in -
version of the direction of the arrow, which in the 
case of the icon of The British Museum could have 
been pointing upwards. Interestingly, in several 
Japanese representations of Trailokyavijaya, both 
sculptural and pictorial, when the arrow is held 
pointing upwards, the index finger of the hand 
holding it is often kept extended (Fig. 6.8).150 As 
148. The surface was too unclear to determine with 
certainty if there was an implement there, even by closer 
inspection.
149. The tarjanī-mudrā is a gesture of threat, so it would 
be absolutely appropriate for a wrathful deity. However, 
this mudrā is not part of the usual iconography of Trailok-
yavijaya.
150. For pictorial examples, see the Trailokyavijaya 
from the 13th-century Set of Five Vidyārājas from the 
Fig. 6.14: Trailokyavijaya. Bronze, 14.5 cm, early 
10th century. The British Museum, London, acc. no. 
1859,1228.94 © The Trustees of the British Museum.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   116 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 125] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains117
for the bow, it appears likely that it was held in 
the top-left hand, like in the case of the icons in 
Jakarta and Munich, given the very similar posture 
of the relative arm, which is kept rather stretched 
outwards, leaving enough room for the weapon. 
It is perfectly possible that even the rest of the 
attributes coincided with those of the sculptures 
in Jakarta and Munich, obviously with the cakra  
moved from the hand of the mid right arm to that 
of the low right arm. This would justify the pres-
ence of the extended index finger, although this, 
later, must have been bent. In fact, if we look from 
the rear at the way the sculpture in Jakarta holds 
the cakra, it appears that the index is kept separat -
ed from the rest of the fingers, slightly raised above 
them, naturally curved, in contact with the back 
of the cakra. The Trailokyavijaya at The British 
Museum could well have held the unidentified 
object looking like a crescent shaped knife in his 
mid-left hand, while if he had an elephant-goad 
in the low left hand, its handle must have been 
relatively short: the hand of the deity, in fact, is 
kept in line with the leg stretched right below it, 
in contrast with other examples, where the deity 
keeps the low right arm forward enough to allow 
the elephant-goad to pass in front of the knee. The 
deity stands in pratyālīḍha, with a posture slightly 
less angular than that of the piece in Jakarta. His 
right foot is over Umā’s breast, while the left is 
on Maheśvara’s chest, not on his head (which 
logically is not turned to avoid the blow). Even 
in this case, the interlaced posture of the tram -
pled deities recalls the piece from Bodhgayā (Fig. 
6.5). They only wear a high crown and earrings 
(Umā’s ones are long, while Maheśvara’s ones 
are button-like), and do not have sacred chords 
nor bracelets. They do not hold attributes: Umā’s 
hands rest on her open tights, in the proximity of her genitals, while Maheśvara’s hands rest on his 
knees. The heavenly couple was lying on a pedestal, 
which now is missing.
From a technical point of view, the image is 
solid cast in two main parts: the body of Trailok-
Daigo-ji (Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, n. 12-3) and the 
Trailokyavijaya from the 13th/14th-century Hanging scroll 
of the Five Vidyārājas now in the Nara National Museum 
(945-0).yavijaya on top, and the trampled couple below. 
The two parts are joined together through cement -
ed struts that, from the sole of the feet of Trailok-
yavijaya, penetrate in the chests of the two lying 
deities. These, in turn, were attached to the missing 
pedestal through three struts. Some small decora-
tive elements, such as the ornaments on the crowns, 
appear to have been separately cast, as they visually 
appear slightly separated from the main body of 
the sculpture. The attributes, or at least some of 
them, were also separately cast and inserted into 
holes in the hands of the deity. According to Bernet 
Kempers, this way of fixing the attributes is quite 
common in Tibet, but has so far been rarely found 
in Java.151 
From the stylistic point of view, the icon pre-
sents many characteristics of the production of 
the second half of the 9th or early 10th century: 
delicate, round, and serene faces, a very balanced 
shape, regular proportions, a minimal moulding 
of the traits, and a relatively light ornamentation, 
which does not compromise the harmony of the 
whole composition.152 However, the tall, elongated 
headgear, with its spiky ornaments, is an element 
that apparently began to emerge at the beginning 
of the 10th century. As the deity wears only two 
bracelets per arm, it was probably produced before 
the icon from Jakarta, which we have dated mid-
10th century. Thus, we should probably consider 
the figurine in London as crafted in the early 10th 
century.153
An eight-armed Trailokyavijaya from the 
National Museum of Ethnology, Leiden  
(RV-1403-1760)
This eight-armed Trailokyavijaya from Leiden’s 
National Museum of Ethnology (Figs. 6.15 and 
6.16) stands apart from all the other figures of the 
deity found in Java, for iconographical and stylistic  
151. Bernet Kempers 1935: 109.
152. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 31; Lunsingh 
Scheurleer 1994: 79–80.
153. Linrothe (1992: 418) dates it back to the mid-10th 
century. See fn. 142.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   117 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 126] ---
Michel Gauvain118
reasons alike.154 Everything below his ankles is lost, 
so we can only assume the presence of Maheśvara 
and Umā under his feet, and that of a pedestal 
below them. Despite being a fragment, the figure is 
17 cm in height: a considerable size.155 Apart from 
the customary four faces, the deity has an addition -
al head, placed just above the frontal face, attached 
to what looks like a tall headdress. Lokesh Chandra 
says that it is a Buddha-head,156 and this would put 
this image in connection with the representation of 
Trailokyavijaya found in the Vāgīśvara Mañjuśrī 
Dharmadhātu maṇḍala at Alchi’s Dukhang, which 
also has a Buddha-head on top (Fig. 6.7). However, 
a closer examination of the sculpture reveals that 
the head on top is wrathful, exactly like the rest of 
the faces, and thus it is not a Buddha-head. Maybe 
we should consider this piece as a five-headed 
Trailokyavijaya, although the particular feature 
of the fifth head could be the result of a mistake: 
the artisan might have combined together two dif-
ferent models, one representing the fourth face on 
the rear of the head, and the other representing 
it as an additional head on top.157 In any case, all 
the heads have inlaid-silver eyes, similar to, but 
smaller than those of the bronzes from Achutra-
jpur (Fig. 6.2) and Nālandā Monastery Site 9 (Fig. 
6.4).158 The deity, who stands in pratyālīḍha, has 
two necklaces, a Buddha-garland (as found in all 
the eight-armed examples from East India, and as 
described in the Sādhanamālā),159 flower-shaped 
154. According to Leemans (1885: 48, n. M25) and Juynboll 
(1909: IX), this figurine was donated to Leiden’s National 
Museum of Ethnology in December 1843 by the widow of 
General Elout. They probably refer to Henriëtte Josina van 
Eybergen, wife of Cornelis Theodorus Elout (1767–1841), 
who had been Commissioner-General of the Dutch East 
Indies from 1816 to 1819.
155. Juynboll 1909: 94.
156. Lokesh Chandra 1999: 3647.
157. Moving the fourth face away from the rear of the head 
is a common solution in the case of images not sculpted 
in round, or in the case of iconographical drawings. The 
options are: not representing the fourth face at all (Fig. 6.6), 
representing it on one side of the head (Fig. 6.5), or repre-
senting it as an additional head on top (i.e. Taishō Shinshū 
Daizōkyō Zuzō 5, fig. 317).
158. According to Leemans, also the teeth are silver inlaid 
(1885: 48, n. M25). 
159. See Figs. 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5. The Sādhanamālā 
refers to this garland strung with tiny Buddha images as 
Fig. 6.15: Trailokyavijaya. Bronze, 17 cm, before 10th 
century. National Museum of Ethnology, Leiden (Col -
lection Nationaal Museum van Wereldculturen. Coll.
no.: RV-1403-1760).
Fig. 6.16: Trailokyavijaya. Bronze, 17 cm, before 10th 
century. National Museum of Ethnology, Leiden (Col -
lection Nationaal Museum van Wereldculturen. Coll.
no.: RV-1403-1760).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   118 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 127] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains119
earrings and armlets, and two simple bracelets at 
the wrists. He wears a short dhotī decorated with 
floral roundels, dots, lines, triangles. Apparent -
ly, two belts and one chord wrap his body at the 
level of the abdomen, the belts locked with two 
flower-shaped buckles. One very long sash or two 
separated sashes of decorated cloth are loosely tied 
with bows to the hips, passing twice on the front 
of the image, below the belt-buckles, with the ends 
falling along the thighs of the deity. A large piece 
of garment, apparently of the same textile of the 
dhotī, falls from below the buckles, and curves 
on a side to wrap the lower part of the left leg. 
The frontal hands form the trailokyavijaya-mudrā  
without holding vajra and vajra-bell. The rest of 
the arms are arranged symmetrically on the two 
sides, and all the hands lost their attributes. Only 
what could be the hilt of a sword can be seen in 
the low right hand. The attribute in the low left  
hand is broken, and is not recognizable, but looks 
like having a circular cross-section. No attribute 
is visible in the other hands—only the holes in 
which the attributes were inserted are visible now. 
The fingers of the mid right and left hands appear 
unnaturally deformed, but only a visual inspection 
could determine the reasons of their shape. The 
posture of the top arms is very common, being em -
ployed in images of Śiva, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Gaṇeśa, 
Avalokiteśvara, Amoghapāśa, and Cunda.160 
From a stylistic point of view, this wrathful 
Trailokyavijaya does not reflect the typical Java -
nese features and thus I would argue that this is 
an imported figurine, or a figurine modelled after 
one or more imported icons. The naturalistic sil -
houette, the detailing of the garment folds, the 
sharply pointed noses, and the prominent eyes, are 
typical characteristics of the Pāla bronzes.161 We 
know that several centres of the Pāla school had 
an influence on Java: Jhewāri (Chittagong district)  
 
‘buddasragdāmamālādivicitrāmbarābharaṇadhāriṇam ’ 
(Foucher 1905: 58–60; Bhattacharyya 1958: 184–185; 
Mallmann 1986: 382).
160. See for instance Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 
58, 59, 60, 65, 68, 69, 72, 74, 75, 77, 78, 81, 87, 88, 89, 90, 111; 
Fontein 1971: 39; Lunsingh Scheurleer and Bernet Kempers 
1985: 178; Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 93.
161. Linrothe 1992: 415.and Mainamati (Comilla district), in present-day 
South-east Bangladesh, Achutrajpur in Odisha, and 
later Nālandā and Kurkihār, in Bihar.162 For this 
piece, Linrothe suggests a connection with Bengal.163 
Unluckily, no Trailokyavijaya from that region sur -
vives. Given that almost all of the surviving images 
of the deity from the Indian subcontinent were 
found in Bihar, particularly in Nālandā, and given 
the existence of a direct connection between this 
centre and Java (the presence of a monastery for the 
accommodation of Javanese monks and pilgrims 
built at the will of the king of Śrīvijaya, Bālaputra 
of the Śailendra dynasty),164 it would seem likely 
that the model for this icon could have come from 
that area. However, some elements of the statuette 
reveal influences from other areas: according to 
Linrothe, the sequence of belts may be a Javanese 
adaptation of South Indian sculptural traditions.165 
Indeed, the use of the sash tied around the hips 
could be an adaptation of Pallava-style models from 
Nāgapaṭṭinam or Kāñcīpuram, in Tamil Nadu.166 
The presence of elements from both the southern 
and the north-eastern regions of the Indian sub-
continent, and the lack of any apparent Javanese 
element, make me wonder if the statuette itself, 
or anyway its model, could have been produced 
in a different place (that is to say, neither in the 
Indian subcontinent nor in Java), a place that was 
receptive of the influences from both southern and 
northern India, and possibly on the way to Java, i.e. 
Sri Lanka. For this piece, Linrothe suggests a dating 
of late 9th or early 10th century,167 but in doing so, 
he also quotes Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke, 
who affirm that ‘dating such images is extremely 
difficult’, for they ‘give virtually no holdfast for the 
establishment of their date and place of manufac-
ture.’168 Linrothe’s dating is a perfectly possible 
option, as the importation of bronze figurines from 
162. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 27–30; Klokke 
and Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 4; Huntington 1994: 58–66; 
Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 79; Mechling 2014: 32.
163. Linrothe 1992: 415–416.
164. Fontein 1971: 33; Lerner and Kossak 1991: 162.
165. Linrothe 1992: 416.
166. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 26–27, 31; 
Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 78.
167. Linrothe 1992: 416.
168. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 23.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   119 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 128] ---
Michel Gauvain120
the Indian subcontinent to Java is attested from 
the 7th century and continued until the mid-9th 
century to 10th century.169 I feel, however, that the 
line of reasoning Linrothe followed (‘It exhibits 
little of the thick and spiky ornamentation which 
marks the Eastern Javanese style beginning in the 
tenth century’)170 would not apply in the case of an 
imported figurine. On the other hand, if the figurine 
was produced in Java, it could also be very early, 
as Javanese artists started introducing Javanese 
characteristics such as the delicate facial features 
even before the mid-9th century.171 
A two-armed bronze Trailokyavijaya sold by 
Sotheby’s on 19 March 2016 (lot 1323)
A one-headed, two-armed bronze Trailokyavijaya, 
10.2 cm in height and said to be from Java, was 
sold by Sotheby’s in 2016, as a piece of the 9th 
or 10th century (Fig. 6.17). The deity forms the 
trailokyavijaya-mudrā  without holding vajra  and 
vajra-bell, and stands in pratyālīḍha posture with 
the right foot over Umā’s belly and breast, and 
the left foot on the back and right side of the 
head of Maheśvara, who is lying face down on the 
pedestal with the head turned right, a posture that 
recalls the stone image from Nālandā Monastery 
Site 1 (Fig. 6.1). He has a high pointed headgear 
decorated with three small, seated tathāgatas 
(again like the stone image from Nālandā Site 1), 
and apart from a short dhotī, decorated with floral 
roundels, dots, and lines, he wears a necklace, 
earrings, spiky flower-shaped armlets, beaded 
bracelets and anklets, maybe another type of 
wristlet, and a Buddha-garland which strangely 
falls down from the left shoulder, passes in 
front of the left forearm, and then turns around 
the hips like a loose belt (looking like ending 
nowhere).172 He also apparently wears a cross-  
169. Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 77, 79, 80.
170. Linrothe 1992: 416.
171. Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 29; Huntington 
1994: 65–66; Klokke and Lunsingh Scheurleer 1994: 5.
172. In this case, the Buddha-garland resembles more of 
a band rather than a large necklace. Cf. Figs. 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 
6.15, 6.16. See fn. 158.body striped sash passing over the left shoulder. 
The position of the deities under Trailokyavijaya’s 
feet is not interlaced like in the other pieces from 
Java. From the picture published on Sotheby’s 
website, it would seem that some attributes are 
placed around their bodies, on the pedestal, a 
feature that, if confirmed, would recall the bronze 
Trailokyavijaya from Achutrajpur (Fig. 6.2). The 
pedestal consists of an open-work plinth with 
floral motives instead of a more common double-
lotus. According to the website, there is a small 
rectangular aperture on the base, directly behind 
Trailokyavijaya, which probably supported a 
vertical structure, possibly holding up a halo and/
or an umbrella over the deity.
Taking into account the tall headgear, the spiky, 
dense, protuberant, and seemingly separately cast Fig. 6.17: Trailokyavijaya. Bronze, 10.2 cm, 9th or 10th 
century. Sotheby’s Sale N09841, Lot 1323, 19 March 2016 
(Photograph Courtesy of Sotheby’s, Inc. © 2016).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   120 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 129] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains121
decorations, the possible presence of three brace-
lets on each arm (although not on the elbow), and 
the rare use of an open-worked pedestal, I would 
suggest that this figurine was probably manufac-
tured not earlier than the third quarter of the 10th 
century, and possibly in the last quarter. 
This piece is strikingly similar to the stone 
image of Trailokyavijaya from Nālandā Monastery 
Site 1 (Fig. 6.1), not only for the face-down posture 
of Maheśvara, but above all for the facial features 
(eyebrows, eyes and nose). In contrast with all the 
images of the deity in Javanese style examined 
above, this one is characterized by a wrathful ex-
pression, and strictly follows the Indian model. 
The dhotī, on the other hand, looks very similar 
to that of the figurine in Leiden. The presence 
of the Buddha-garland, which does not seem to 
have a coherent physical structure and therefore 
potentially betrays a lack of understanding of this 
adornment, is rather exceptional: no other image 
in Javanese style wears it, and in India it is found 
exclusively in eight-armed images of the deity.
A ritual spike topped by a two-armed wrathful 
deity in trailokyavijaya-mudrā , stored in the 
Archaeological Heritage Preservation Office 
(BP3) of Yogyakarta (BG.49)
In a recently published study about religious art of 
Indonesia, Naoko Itō briefly describes a ritual spike, 
or kīla, found in Sleman, in Central Java, now stored 
in the Archaeological Heritage Preservation Office 
(Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala, BP3) 
of Yogyakarta, in Bogem (Fig. 6.18).173 Although 
this kind of implement has risen to prominence 
in Tibet, where it came to play a central role in an 
independent deity-cycle, in Indian and East Asian 
Buddhism alike it more frequently played the role 
of subsidiary ritual element.174 In the course of its 
development, the kīla passed from being a simple 
wooden peg for boundary making, employed 
with cords to establish the outline of buildings 
before construction, to being a boundary marker, 
indicating that a rule or law applies within a special 
area (i.e. the royal palace), to being a means for 
173. Itō 2019: 182–184. See also Itō 2002: 26–27.
174. Cantwell and Mayer 2008: 17.protecting important spaces from the intrusion 
of obstructing forces, creating a sort of magical 
barrier surrounding and enclosing specific areas 
(i.e. a sacred palace, a vihāra, an altar, or even a 
city). In the process, kīlas came to be conceived 
as objects worthy of honour in themself and came 
to be meditated upon as the actual embodiments 
of specific wrathful deities invoked to protect 
certain areas from vighnas, or obstructing demons. 
Other uses of the kīlas, employed singularly or in 
groups, are connected with a more active idea of 
killing (outer or inner enemies), subjugating local 
spirits, controlling the weather, or even keeping 
under control a ritually revived corpse. Different 
texts provide various instructions concerning the 
number of spikes to be employed and the size, 
shapes and materials for their production, some 
relating certain materials—usually khadira (acacia) Fig. 6.18: Ritual spike topped by a two-armed wrathful 
deity in trailokyavijaya-mudrā , from Sleman (Central 
Java). Bronze, 10.6 cm, 8th to 10th century. Archaeolog -
ical Heritage Preservation Office (BP3) of Yogyakarta, 
Bogem, acc. no. BG.49 (Photo: Swati Chemburkar).
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   121 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 130] ---
Michel Gauvain122
or other kinds of wood, but also iron, copper, or in 
some cases bone—to specific ritual ends.175
The piece preserved in the Archaeological 
Office of Yogyakarta is made of bronze, 10.6 cm 
in height. According to Itō, it dates from the 8th 
to the 10th century. It is visually composed of two 
sections, separated by a central band decorated 
with a line of relatively large beads. The lower, 
dagger-like section of the object is in the shape 
of a one-pronged vajra (now truncated), with 
a clearly chiselled syllable hūṃ inscribed on its 
front-side.176 The upper section of the object, on 
the other hand, is in the shape of a one-head -
ed, two-armed deity in trailokyavijaya-mudrā, 
possibly Trailokyavijaya, represented from the 
abdomen up, with the hands interlocked at the 
level of the chest, without holding vajra and va-
jra-bell.177 The face of the deity is characterized by 
wide eyes, a pointed nose, and protruding fangs. 
He has long and wavy hair tied in a protuberant, 
conical headdress, and wears a skull crown fixed 
to the head by what looks like a twisted string or 
band, with floral roundels attached slightly above 
the ears. From these, two plain strings (of hair?) 
fall behind the ears, lie on the shoulders, make a 
U-curve and then fall on the chest, at the level of 
the armpits. The strings appear to be fixed to the 
shoulders by another pair of floral roundels, and 
their extremities seem to be decorated with a kind 
of bow. The deity also wears a necklace, large ring 
earrings with three pendants (the central one the 
longest, each ending with a smaller ring), flow -
er-shaped armlets, single bracelets at the elbows, 
and triple bracelets at the wrists.
For kīlas, the one-pronged vajra shape was 
already recommended, along with the shape of 
a three-pronged vajra, in the Susiddhikarasūtra, 
175. Boord 1993: 39–67.
176. A syllable hūṃ  also appears on the backdrop of the 
stone Trailokyavijaya from Nālandā Monastery Site 1, to 
the proper right of the deity’s crown (see Fig. 6.1).
177. The identification of the deity with Trailokyavijaya/
Vajrahūṃkāra is not immune from doubts: the trailokyavi-
jaya-mudrā may be adopted as a general sign of wrath, and 
is not an exclusive prerogative of Trailokyavijaya; further, 
the absence of the lower part of the body, replaced in this 
case by the one-pronged vajra shape, deprive us of other 
potential clues to the identification, such as the pratyālīḍha  
posture and the heavenly couple under the deity’s feet.a work which is considered representative of 
the Kriyātantras, translated into Chinese by 
Śubhākarasiṃha in 726.178 On the basis of this text, 
the one-pronged vajra shape apparently became 
the standard in East Asian Esoteric Buddhism; at 
least it became so in Japan, where wooden (or less 
usually iron or copper) one-pronged vajra spikes 
are still the norm, with some possible variations 
in their shape determined by the association of the 
ritual with the Kongōkai or Taizōkai maṇḍala, or 
by the type of ritual activity: in the case of abhiṣekas, 
for instance, the one-pronged vajra spikes may be 
topped by a jewel, the emblem of the Jewel Family 
(ratnakula).179 In the Japanese context, however, we 
do not seem to find examples of ritual spikes with 
the upper section made in the shape of a deity in 
anthropomorphic form, as in the case of the kīla  
from Central Java. 
One of the earliest tantric scriptures to refer 
to such a shape was apparently the Guhyasamā-
jatantra. This work, which was likely composed 
sometime between 750 and 850 CE, was translated 
into both Chinese and Tibetan, respectively by 
Dānapāla (around 1002) and by Rin chen bzang 
po and Śraddhākaravarman (11th century), but 
it never became particularly influential in East 
Asia.180 In a specific section of this text, according 
to Fremantle’s translation, it is affirmed that the 
kīla should be visualized with the upper part in 
the form of the samaya deity and with the lower 
section, ‘from the heart to the feet’, as a sharp 
178. Giebel 2001: 285.
179. See Mikkyō Jiten Hensankai 2007: 674; Arai 1996, vol. 
1: 141; Boord 1993: 50, fn. 174 and 65, fn. 251. According to 
these sources, the four vajrakīlas brought back from Tang 
China by Kōbō Daishi Kūkai in 806, now in the collection 
of Murōji ( 室生寺 ), in Nara Prefecture, are in the shape 
of a one-pronged vajra topped by a jewel resting over a 
half-moon on a lotus flower. It might be worthwhile to 
compare these spikes to those brought back by Engyō ( 圓
行; 799–852) in 839 and by Enchin ( 圓珍 ; 814–891) in 858, 
if still existing, so to confirm the hypothesis that the one-
pronged vajra shape was essentially the standard in Tang 
China. It is also said that Eun ( 惠運 ; 798–869), who came 
back from China in 847, brought back adamantine spikes 
(Mikkyō Jiten Hensankai 2007: 674), but I could not find 
any mention of them in the records.
180. Buswell and Lopez 2014: 335. See also Tanaka 2018, 
Chapter 5.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   122 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 131] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains123
spike,181 but according to Boord, this description 
refers to the actual configuration (vijṛmbhita, 
‘manifested’) of the kīla.182 Considering that the 
Vajramālātantra, an early Indian explanatory 
Tantra of the Guhyasamāja system, already de -
scribes the kīla as three-edged in shape,183 as it 
later became customary in Tibet,184 then the spike 
stored at the Archaeological Office of Yogyakarta 
might possibly be representative of a ritual tra -
dition which gained prominence later than the 
STTS as transmitted and rooted in East Asia and 
before—or concurrently with—the early redac -
tions of the Guhyasamāja. We have no certainty, 
however, that such a tradition was based on either 
of these two contiguous tantric cycles.
conclusion
On the basis of the available sources, the cult of 
Trailokyavijaya has been present in Java for at least 
two centuries, from the fourth quarter of the 8th 
century to the late 10th or early 11th century, and 
was highly concentrated in the area of Central 
Java, whence all the remains of known provenance 
come from.185 The number of remains found in this 
relatively small area is astonishing if compared 
with what survives in the rest of Asia.
Understanding the origin of the cult is not easy, 
because Java, between the 7th and the 9th century, 
was in the middle of a vast and well-travelled net of 
maritime routes which kept it in constant connec-
tion with Indian, Sri Lankan, Chinese, and Japanese 
esoteric Buddhist circles.186 In a similar context of 
substantial intra-Asian connectivity, it is highly 
probable that several individuals, communities 
and texts contributed to the diffusion of the cult 
in its formative period. 
181. Fremantle 1971: 95.
182. Boord 1993: 61.
183. Ibid.: 61. Jamspal and Kittay 2020.
184. See Huntington 1975.
185. It is to be noted that in 930 CE the governmental seat 
of the reign of Siṇḍok, and with it large part of the cultural 
life of the island, moved from Central to East Java (Lerner 
and Kossak 1991: 165; Lunsingh Scheurleer and Klokke 1988: 
23). While we have statuettes of Trailokyavijaya following 
the style of the East Javanese period, those of known prov-
enance are nonetheless from Central Java.
186. See Acri 2016a: 16.However, from the sources examined in this 
chapter, it would seem that Sri Lanka could have 
played a major role in this scenario. The earliest 
of the inscription analysed, the one engraved on 
the gold foil, was unearthed on the Ratu Boko 
plateau, which at that time was the site of a mon-
astery inhabited by Sinhalese monks, coming from 
the renowned Abhayagirivihāra monastery in Sri 
Lanka. Further, as explained above, I suspect that 
that which apparently is the earliest of the figurines 
analysed, the one now preserved in Leiden, could 
have been crafted in Sri Lanka.
From the overall correspondence of the 
mantras, syllables, and terminology employed in 
the inscriptions, it is clear that the cult was fun-
damentally based on the cycle of the STTS, as pre -
dictable. However, certain features, such as some 
inversion in the order of mantric syllables, are 
indicative of a reliance on specific ritual manuals, 
rather than on the STTS itself, and this fact could 
be highly revealing. Scholars have found a certain 
degree of correspondence with the formulas and 
procedures contained in the Sarvavajrodaya, a 
ritual manual compiled by Ānandagarbha, who 
is also the author of the Tattvālokakarī (D2510/
P3333), a commentary on the STTS which some 
believe to have been especially influential on 
Southeast Asian iconography.187 
Translations of relevant passages from similar 
works could be of help in clarifying some issues 
concerning the iconography of Trailokyavijaya 
in Java. From the examined sources, it seems that 
a number of variants existed in an early period. 
It appears more likely that local ingenuity pro -
duced a uniquely Javanese iconography during 
the 10th century: in the eight hands, the deity 
holds vajra and bell, and then a sword, a cakra, 
an arrow, a bow, a crescent shaped knife, and an 
elephant-goad. No counterpart has been found in 
other countries yet, and the crescent shaped knife 
could well be a Javanese adaptation of a previous 
weapon (as in the case of Vasudhārā, the deity of 
prosperity and abundance, who in Java came to 
grasp an ear of rice, the staple food of the island, 
187. Kanō 2015: 374. It might be just a coincidence, but 
as said above, Ānandagarbha studied under a Sri Lankan 
master, Vajravarman.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   123 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 132] ---
Michel Gauvain124
instead of an ear of grain).188 An alternative ico-
nography, representing the deity in two-armed 
form, seems to have emerged in Java in a slightly 
later period, possibly on the basis of a different 
version of the STTS.189
Pending further discoveries, it seems unlikely 
that Trailokyavijaya was represented as part of 
a maṇḍalic group of four, five, or more krodhas 
in Java: the number of statuettes from the island 
reported to have been clearly identified as wrathful 
deities other than Trailokyavijaya is, in fact, too 
scarce.190 It is more probable, therefore, that 
the figurines of Trailokyavijaya were enshrined 
individually, or else in combination with images 
of non-wrathful deities. Given the impossibility 
to evaluate the relative rank of the deity within a 
maṇḍalic assembly, and in the face of the almost 
complete loss of the production of bronzes of large 
size in Java, we are left in uncertainty about the 
actual centrality of his cult on the island. 
On a ritual level, the figure of Trailokyavijaya 
was clearly connected with a protective function 
exercised through subjugative means aiming at 
the destruction or else at the forceful conversion 
188. Bernet Kempers 1959: pl. 112; Lunsingh Scheurleer 
and Klokke 1988: 22, 84; Mechling 2014: 29, 32.
189. As noticed by Inui and reported by Hunter, Dānapā-
la’s Chinese translation of the STTS does not describe 
Trailokyavijaya/Vajrahūṃkāra as multi-armed, and this 
suggests that the Sanskrit manuscript he employed for his 
translation ‘belongs to a textual tradition different from the 
Sanskrit manuscripts that Amoghavajra consulted’ (Inui 
1996: 88 and Inui 1997: 11; Hunter 2018: 390–391).
190. Itō 2019: 28. The existence of a set of five krodhas 
is recorded in the Balinese manuscript of the Saṅ Hyaṅ 
Nāgabāyusūtra, but the list does not seem to include Trailok -
yavijaya. The text, in fact, describes a unique model having 
Navab(h)ava as a manifestation of Vairocana, Yamamaraja 
of Akṣobhya, Simhāvaha of Ratnasaṃbhava, Matthāna of 
Amitābha, and Vatsala of Amoghasiddhi (Bosch 1961: 116–
118; Lokesh Chandra 1995: 27). In the National Museum of 
Indonesia there is a set of four figurines representing a group 
of one-headed, two-armed deities in trailokyavijaya-mudrā, 
among which one stands in pratyālīḍha (5933). However, a 
closer look reveals that each of the deities also holds a specific 
attribute: an elephant-goad, a rope, a chain, and a bell. The 
group therefore represents the four gate-guardians of the 
Vajradhātu, the Gathering Bodhisattvas, in wrathful form: 
Vajrāṅkuśa (5913), Vajrapāśa (5933), Vajrasphoṭa (5909), 
and Vajrāveśa (5929) (Matsunaga 1999: 329, 301).of ‘obstacles’, a term variously indicating inner or 
outer obstructions, such as vināyakas and all sorts 
of beings who might cause trouble when ill-dis -
posed (devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, 
garuḍas, kiṃnaras, mahoragas), more ordinary 
enemies, as well as diseases. It seems clear that 
the deity’s power was invoked when ritually es -
tablishing boundaries in order to protect from the 
intrusion of negative influences in some specific 
areas: altars, temples, monastic complexes, but 
potentially also cities, regions, or a whole kingdom. 
This latter possibility, in particular, needs to be 
investigated further.
It is still unclear if the mantra engraved on 
the Ratu Boko gold foil was intended to provide 
protection to King Panaraban, possibly through 
the intervention of Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya 
and/or of the great generals of the yakṣas with 
their armies and retinues, as suggested above, or 
if it was conceived as a means to spellbind and 
convert him from Śaivism to Buddhism, in an in-
triguing re-enactment of the myth of Trailokyavi-
jaya’s subjugation of Śiva, as hypothesized in the 
past. However, in the light of the ritual functions 
generally associated with Trailokyavijaya and the 
Ṭakkirāja mantra, taking into account the parallel 
between the case of the Ratu Boko mantra and 
the example found in Amoghavajra’s Dhāraṇī of 
Leaf-clad Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva, and consid-
ered the material employed to craft the mantra, I 
would tend to regard the former hypothesis as 
more plausible.
appendix 6.1
Resumé of the myth of Trailokyavijaya’s subju -
gation of Śiva-Maheśvara, based on the accounts 
reported in the Sanskrit edition of the STTS, as 
translated in Italian by Tucci and in English by 
Snellgrove and Davidson, and in the Chinese 
edition of the text, as summarized in French by 
Iyanaga:191
On the peak of Mount Sumeru, All the Tathāga-
tas (that in esoteric Buddhism means the Five 
191. Tucci 1932: 135–145; Snellgrove 1987: 134–141; Davidson 
1995: 547–555; Iyanaga 1985: 667–682.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   124 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 133] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains125
Buddhas) requested Vajrapāṇi to generate his 
adamantine family, so that a maṇḍala-assembly 
could be established for the benefit of all beings. 
Unexpectedly, Vajrapāṇi declines, affirming 
that in the world there are some beings, such 
as Maheśvara and other gods, who engage in all 
kinds of violent and criminal conduct: if even 
the Tathāgatas are not able to subdue them, 
how could he accomplish anything with them? 
So, the Buddha Vairocana enters into a samā-
dhi (intense concentration) and utters a mantra 
(oṃ śumbha niśumbha hūṃ gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ 
gṛhṇapaya hūṃ ānaya ho bhagavan vajra hūṃ 
phaṭ). As a consequence, several forms of Va-
jrapāṇi emerge from the Five Tathāgatas and 
fill the three worlds. These forms then come 
together to compose a great body a wrathful 
manifestation, Trailokyavijaya. Vairocana then 
recites another mantra (hūṃ ṭakki jjaḥ), which 
drags Maheśvara and his entourage around his 
palace, on the summit of Mount Sumeru. 
At this point, Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya com-
mands Maheśvara and his retinue to take 
refuge in the Three Jewels, so that they could 
reach the knowledge of the Omniscient One. 
Maheśvara replies: ‘Hey, you’re just a pathet-
ic yakṣa! I am the creator and the destroyer of 
all beings, the paramount Lord of the Three 
Worlds, the self-existent great god of gods. And 
yet you order me to act as you would wish?’ 
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya answers: ‘You, ex-
tremely evil being, come and take place in my 
maṇḍala, and hold to my pledge!’
Maheśvara, turning to Vairocana, asks: ‘Who 
does he think he is, giving orders to God?’. Vai-
rocana tells him and all the gods: ‘I’d really do 
what he says, my friend! Take refuge in Three 
Jewels! Do not make him angry: he could de-
stroy the three worlds with his blazing vajra’. 
Maheśvara, does not follow Vairocana’s advice: 
proud of his own knowledge and sovereignty 
over the three worlds, he turns again to Va-
jrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya, and displaying his own 
wrathful, flaming manifestation, with a terrible 
voice and laughing wickedly, exclaims: ‘Hey, I am the Lord of the Three Worlds, YOU will do 
what I command!’
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya, smiling, replies: 
‘You, stinking demon, you eat the charred flesh 
of cremated corpses, and your bed and clothes 
are disgusting remains. Acting like this, how 
do you think I could ever follow your orders? 
Come, and obey my commands!’ Maheśvara, 
furious, replies: ‘If you put it in that way, I will 
protect my own authority!’
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya turns to Vairoca-
na, and explains that Maheśvara, proud of 
his knowledge and sovereignty over the three 
worlds, is obstinate in refusing to accept the 
teaching of the Tathāgatas. He asks: ‘Now what 
do I do with him?’
Vairocana recites again a mantra (oṃ niśumbha 
vajra hūṃ phaṭ), and Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavi-
jaya adds the syllable hūṃ. Immediately, all the 
gods fall down to the ground, into great suffer-
ing. Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya tells them that if 
they want to be saved, they must take refuge in 
the Three Jewels and obey his orders. 
Maheśvara is on the ground, in desperate con-
ditions, but still asks to Vairocana: ‘If I take 
refuge, then whose orders will I have to take? 
That’s my question’. Vairocana answers: ‘You 
should know that Vajrapāṇi is the Supreme 
Lord of All the Tathāgatas. He received a 
wrathful consecration so that now he is able to 
transform those beings who are so evil that not 
even the Tathāgatas can redeem. He is the only one who can truly save you, not I’. Maheśvara is 
about to die, but continues to protest, affirming 
that he could accept to receive teachings from 
the Buddha, but not from Vajrapāṇi-Trailok-
yavijaya. 
The gods of Maheśvara’s entourage supplicate 
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya to save them, and ask 
him how he could harm them, if he really is the 
Lord of All the Tathāgatas. Vajrapāṇi-Trailok-
yavijaya answers that evil beings such as them 
must be purified before they can enter into the 
pledge of all the Tathāgatas. 
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   125 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 134] ---
Michel Gauvain126
The gods convert and promise to enter into Va-
jrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya’s pledge. The latter re-
cites a mantra, and all the gods, but Maheśvara 
and his consort, are released from their suffer-
ing.
Vairocana asks to Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya 
why Maheśvara is still on the ground. Trailok-
yavijaya recites a mantra for the protection of 
life. Maheśvara tries to get up, but he cannot. 
He asks again who he should take as his mas-
ter. Vairocana replies: ‘I cannot help evil beings 
such as you’. Maheśvara is confused: ‘I cannot 
understand: the Buddha is the master of the 
Three Words. How could Vajrapāṇi-Trailok-
yavijaya be superior to him?’
At this point, Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya tells 
him: ‘You, evil being, why don’t you just do 
what I tell you?’ Hearing this, Maheśvara gets 
enraged again, displaying an even more wrath-
ful form than before, and shouts out: ‘I’d rather 
die. I will never accept your orders!’ 
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya, King of Wrath, re-
cites a mantra to purify Maheśvara. The god 
and his divine consort, Umā, suddenly fall to 
the ground, legs up in the air, with the pudenda 
indecently exposed. All the gods laugh at the 
scene. 
Maheśvara and Umā are both dragged in front 
of Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya, who then asks 
Vairocana how to subjugate the extremely 
wicked god and his spouse. Vairocana recites 
a mantra of attack, and Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavi-
jaya steps on the two, oppressing Maheśvara to 
the ground with his left foot, and pushing more 
gently his right foot on Umā’s breast. 
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya then pronounces a 
mantra, and Maheśvara, under his foot, starts 
beating his own thousand faces with his thou-
sand arms. The gods shout: ‘Look at our Lord, 
being disciplined by this powerful Great Being!’
Then Vairocana, out of compassion for Ma-
heśvara, recites a mantra. Through the touch 
of Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya’s foot, Maheśvara immediately obtains a peerless realisation, ex-
cellent samādhis and supernatural powers, and 
gets to the rank of the Tathāgatas. By virtue of 
this consecration, his consciousness reaches a 
distant world called Bhasmācchanna (‘Covered 
in Ash’),192 where he is reborn as the Buddha 
Bhasmeśvaranirghoṣa (‘Soundless Lord of 
Ashes’).
Then Vairocana, with a mantra, draws back 
Maheśvara’s consciousness, which takes 
back the inanimate body under the foot of 
Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya. From there, he 
proclaims: ‘Oh! The great knowledge of the 
Tathāgatas is peerless! Being subjugated, I was 
established in the unchanging dignity of Nir-
vāṇa!’
At this point, Vajrapāṇi-Trailokyavijaya commands 
the deities to take their position in the maṇḍala, and 
to hold the pledge of all the Tathāgatas. The gods 
answer: ‘We will do as you command!’ Taking place 
in the maṇḍala, they are finally consecrated and 
given new vajra-names and attributes, to denote 
their new Buddhist status and their acceptance of 
the pledge to quit their evil ways.
192. Here I follow Giebel (1995: 144, fn. 57), while other 
authors have ‘Bhasmacchatra’ (‘Umbrella of Ashes’).References
Abé, Ryūichi. 1999. The Weaving of Mantra: Kūkai 
and the Construction of Esoteric Buddhist Dis-
course. New York: Columbia University Press.
Acri, Andrea. 2016a. ‘Introduction: Esoteric 
Buddhist Networks along the Maritime Silk 
Routes, 7th–13th Century AD’, in Andrea Acri 
(ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime 
Asia: Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, pp. 1–25. 
Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute.
. 2016b. ‘Once More on the “Ratu Boko 
Mantra”: Magic, Realpolitik, and Bauddha-
Śaiva Dynamics in Ancient Nusantara’, in 
Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in 
Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons, pp. 323–348. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   126 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 135] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains127
Amar, Abhishek S. 2012. ‘Buddhist Responses to 
Brāhma ṇa Challenges in Medieval India: Bodh -
gayā and Gayā’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society (Series 3) 22/1: 155–185.
Anom, I.G.N. (ed.). 2005. The Restoration of Borobu -
dur. Paris: UNESCO Publishing. (http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0014/001433/143333e.pdf)
Arai, Kōjun ( 新井弘順 ), Masanobu Satō ( 佐藤正
伸), and Chijō Soeno ( 添野智譲 ). 1996. Zusetsu 
Shingon-shū no hosshiki ( 図説真言宗の法式 ), 
2 vols. Tōkyō: Saisaibō ( 斎々坊 ).
Bentor, Yael. 1996. Consecration of Images and 
Stūpas in Indo-Tibetan Tantric Buddhism. 
Leiden: Brill.
Bernet Kempers, A.J. 1935. ‘Raffles’ Bronscollectie 
in het British Museum’, Maandblad voor 
Beeldende Kunsten 12 (April): 99–113.
. 1959. Ancient Indonesian Art. Amsterdam: 
C.P.J. van der Peet.
Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh. 1932. An Introduction 
to Buddhist Esoterism. London: H. Milford, 
Oxford University Press.
. 1958. The Indian Buddhist Iconography. 
Calcutta: K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Bodrogi, Tibor. 1972. Art of Indonesia. Greenwich, 
Conn.: New York Graphic Society.
Boechari. 1982. ‘Preliminary Report on Some 
Archaeological Finds around the Borobudur 
Temple’, Pelita Borobudur, Doc. CC/V/6/1976, 
pp. 90–95.
Bogel, Cynthea J. 2010. With a Single Glance: Bud-
dhist Icons and Early Mikkyō  Vision. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press.
. 2011. ‘The Tōji Lecture Hall Statue Mandala 
and the Choreography of Mikkyō’, in Charles 
D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and Richard 
K. Payne (eds.), Esoteric Buddhism and the 
Tantras in East Asia. Leiden and Boston:  
Brill.
Boord, Martin J. 1993. The Cult of the Deity 
Vajrakīla: According to the Texts of the Northern 
Treasures Tradition of Tibet (Byang-gter phur-
ba). Tring, U.K.: The Institute of Buddhist 
Studies.
Bosch, F.D.K. 1961. Selected Studies in Indonesian 
Archaeology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.Bowie, Theodore, M.C. Subhadradis Diskul, and 
Alexander B. Griswold. 1972. The Sculpture of 
Thailand. New York: Asia Society.
Buswell, Robert E. and Donald S. Lopez. 2014. The 
Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Cantwell, Cathy and Robert Mayer. 2008. Early 
Tibetan Documents on Phur pa from Dunhuang . 
Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.
de Casparis, J.G. 1961. ‘New Evidence on Cultural 
Relations between Java and Ceylon in Ancient 
Times’, Artibus Asiae 24/3–4: 241–248.
. 1991. ‘Reviewed Work: Ancient Indonesian 
Bronzes; A Catalogue of the Exhibition in the 
Rijksmuseum Amsterdam with a General 
Introduction by Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer 
and Marijke J. Klokke’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 147/2: 349–351.
Cœdès, George. 1924. ‘Études cambodgiennes’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
24: 345–358.
. 1937. Inscriptions du Cambodge, 8 vols. 
Paris: École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1955. ‘Etudes d’épigraphie 
indonésienne. IV: Discussion de la date des 
inscriptions’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 47/1: 7–290.
. 1970. Répertoire onomastique de l’épigra-
phie javanaise (jusqu’à Pu Siṇḍok Śrī 
Īśānawikrama Dharmottuṅgadewa). Paris: 
École française d’Extrême-Orient.
Davidson, Ronald M. 1991. ‘Reflections on the 
Maheśvara Subjugation Myth: Indic materi -
als, Sa-skya-pa Apologetics, and the birth of 
Heruka’, Journal of the International Associa-
tion of Buddhist Studies 14/2: 197–225.
. 1995. ‘The Bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi’s Subju-
gation of Śiva’, in Donald Lopez (ed.), Religions 
of India in Practice, pp. 547–555. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
. 2002. Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social 
History of the Tantric Movement. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Dreitlein, Thomas Eijō. 2018. ‘Yūkai’s Jūhachidō 
nenju kubi shidai’, Kōyasan Daigaku Ronsō  
(高野山大学論叢 ) 53.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   127 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 136] ---
Michel Gauvain128
Eka Hadiyanta (ed.). 2011. Katalog Koleksi Arca 
Perunggu. Yogyakarta: Yogyakarta Balai Pele-
starian Peninggalan Purbakala.
Fontein, Jan. 1971. Ancient Indonesian Art of the 
Central and Eastern Javanese Periods. New 
York: The Asia Society Inc.
Fontein, Jan, R. Soekmono, and Edi Sedyawati. 
1990. The Sculpture of Indonesia. Washington 
and New York: National Gallery of Art.
Foucher, Alfred. 1905. Étude sur l’iconographie 
bouddhique de l’Inde: d’après des textes inédits. 
Paris: E. Leroux.
. 1909. ‘Notes d’archéologie bouddhique’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  
9: 1–50.
. 1917. The Beginnings of Buddhist Art, and 
Other Essays in Indian and Central-Asian Ar-
chaeology. Paris: P. Geuthner.
Fremantle, Francesca. 1971. A Critical Study of the 
Guhyasamāja Tantra. PhD dissertation, Uni -
versity of London.
Giebel, Rolf W. 1995. ‘The Chin-kang-ting ching 
yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei: An Annotated 
Translation’, Naritasan Bukkyō Kenkyū Kiyō   
(成田山佛教研究紀要 ) 18: 107–201.
. 2001. Two Esoteric Sutras: The Adamantine 
Pinnacle Sutra, the Susiddhikara Sutra. Berke-
ley, Calif.: Numata Center for Buddhist Trans-
lation and Research.
. 2012. ‘Notes on Some Sanskrit Texts 
Brought Back to Japan by Kūkai’, Pacific World: 
Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies, 
Third Series 14: 187–230.
Goepper, Roger. 1993. Aizen-Myōō : The Esoteric 
King of Lust—An Iconological Study ( Artibus 
Asiae, Supplementum v. 39). Zurich: Museum 
Rietberg.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2014a. ‘Written traces of the 
Buddhist past: Mantras and Dhāraṇīs in 
Indonesian inscriptions’, Bulletin of the School 
of Oriental and African Studies 77: 137–194.
. 2014b. ‘The “Greatly Ferocious” Spell: A 
dhāraṇī Inscribed on a Lead-Bronze Foil 
Unearthed near Borobudur’, in Kurt Tropper 
(ed.), Epigraphic Evidence in the Pre-Modern 
Buddhist World, Proceedings of the Eponymous Conference Held in Vienna, 14–15 Oct. 2011,  
pp. 1–36. Wien: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und 
Buddhistische Studien Universität Wien.
Habukawa, Shōdō ( 土生川正 ). 2015. Chūin-ryū 
shoshin gyōja gyōyō shinan ( 中院流初心行者
行様指南 ). Kōyasan: Kōyasan Daigaku Kegyō 
Dōjō ( 高野山大学加行道場 ).
Harris, Ian Charles. 2005. Cambodian Buddhism: 
History and Practice. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai’i Press.
Hatta, Yukio ( 八田幸雄 ). 1985. Shingon Jiten ( 真言
事典 ). Tōkyō: Hirakawa Shuppansha.
Havell, Ernest B. 1908. Indian Sculpture and Paint -
ing: Illustrated by Typical Masterpieces, with 
an Explanation of their Motives and Ideals. 
London: John Murray.
Herni Pramastuti et al. 2007. Pusaka Aksara Yogy -
akarta: Alih Aksara dan Alih Bahasa Prasasti 
Koleksi Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbaka -
la Yogyakarta. Yogyakarta: Balai Pelestarian 
Peninggalan Purbakala.
Herrmann-Pfandt, Adelheid. 2008–2009. ‘The 
Tantric Buddhist Deity Vajrapāṇi-Trailok -
yavijaya in Pāla, Shingon and Tibetan Art and 
Tantra Systematics’, Journal of Bengal Art 13–14: 
31–40.
Hunter, Harriet J. 2018. A Transmission and its 
Transformation: The Liqujing shibahui man -
tuluo in Daigoji. PhD dissertation, Leiden 
University.
Huntington, John C. 1975. The Phur-pa: Tibetan 
Ritual Daggers. Ascona: Artibus Asiae Pub -
lishers.
Huntington, Susan L. 1984. The ‘Pāla-Sena’ Schools 
of Sculpture. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
. 1994. ‘Some Connections between Metal 
Images of Northeast India and Java’, in Marijke 
J. Klokke and Pauline Lunsingh Scheurleer 
(eds.), Ancient Indonesian Sculpture, pp. 57–75. 
Leiden: KITLV Press.
Inui, Hitoshi ( 乾仁志 ). 1996. ‘Shoe Kongōchōkyō 
no yondaibon to mandara no tokushoku’  
(『初会金剛頂経』の四大品とマンダラの特
色), Kōyasan daigaku sōritsu hyakujū shūnen 
kinen Kōyasan daigaku ronbunshū ( 高野山
大学創立百十周年記念高野山大学論文集 ),  
pp. 81–100. Kōyasan: Kōyasan University.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   128 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 137] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains129
. 1997. ‘Kongōchō tantora shosetsu no 
mandara ni tsuite (1)’ ( 『金剛頂タントラ』所
説のマンダラについてⅠ ), Kōyasan Daigaku 
Ronsō ( 高野山大学論叢 ) 32: 1–30.
Ishimoto, Yasuhiro ( 石元泰博 ). 2011. Ry ōgai 
Mandara: T ōji-z ō Kokuh ō ‘Den Shingon’in 
Ryōgai Mandara’ no Sekai ( 両界曼荼羅 : 東寺
蔵国宝伝真言院両界曼荼羅の世界 ). Tōkyō : 
Heibonsha.
Itō, Naoko ( 伊藤奈保子 ). 2002. ‘Jawa no kon -
gobu-kei son kaku no genson sakurei ni tsuite’ 
(ジャワの金剛部系尊格の現存作例について ), 
The Journal of Buddhist Iconography ( 密教図
像) 21: 16–36.
. 2019. Indonesia no shūkyō bijutsu: chūzōzō, 
hōgu no sekai ( インドネシアの宗教美術： 鋳
造像・法具の世界 ). Revised edition. Kyoto: 
Hōzōkan.
Iyanaga, Nobumi. 1983. ‘Daijizaiten’ ( 大自在  
天), in Hōbōgirin ( 法寶義林 ), fasc. 6, pp. 713–
766.
. 1985. ‘Récits de la soumission de Maheśva -
ra par Trailokyavijaya—d’après les sources 
chinoises et japonaises’, in Michel Strickmann 
(ed.), Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of 
R.A. Stein  3, pp. 633–745. Brussels: Institut Belge 
des Hautes Etudes Chinoises. 
Jamspal, Lozang and David R. Kittay. 2020. The 
Vajra Rosary Tantra: An Explanatory Tantra 
of the Esoteric Community Tantra. Somerville, 
MA: Wisdom Publications.
Jasper, J.E. and Mas Pirngadie. 1912–1916. ‘Beeldjes 
van Goden en Dieren’, in De inlandsche kun-
stnijverheid in Nederlandsch Indië. ’s-Graven-
hage: Mouton & Co.
Jordaan, Roy and Brian Colless. 2004. ‘The Ratu 
Boko Mantra and the Śailendras’, Berkala Arke -
ologi 24/1: 56–64.
Juynboll, Hendrik H. 1909. Katalog des Ethnogra-
phischen Reichsmuseums, Band V: Javanische 
Altertümer. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Kandahjaya, Hudaya. 2009. ‘The Lord of All 
Virtues’, Pacific World: Journal of the Institute 
of Buddhist Studies, Third Series 11: 1–24.
Kanō, Kazuo ( 加納和雄 ). 2015. ‘Sarvatathāga -
tatattvasaṃgraha’, in Jonathan A. Silk, Oskar von Hinüber, and Vincent Eltschinger (eds.), 
Brill’s Encyclopedia of Buddhism, Volume One: 
Literature and Languages, pp. 373–389. Leiden:  
Brill.
Karetzky, Patricia Eichenbaum. 1994. ‘Esoteric 
Buddhism and the Famensi Finds’, Archives 
of Asian Art 47: 78–85.
Katō, Kei ( 加藤敬 ) and Yūkei Matsunaga ( 松長有
慶). 1981. Mandara: Buddhist art of Western 
Tibet. Tōkyō: Mainichi Shinbun-sha.
Khokhlov, Yury. 2022. ‘In the Footsteps of 
Amoghavajra (705–774): Southern Indian Ar-
tistic Mode in Tang China and its Transmission 
to Tibet’, in Andrea Acri and Peter Sharrock 
(eds.), The Creative South: Buddhist and Hindu 
Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, Volume One, 
pp. 66–125. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof Ishak 
Institute.
Klokke, Marijke J. and Pauline Lunsingh Scheur-
leer. 1994. Ancient Indonesian Sculpture. Leiden: 
KITLV Press.
Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten 
en Wetenschappen. 1890. Notulen van de al -
gemeene en bestuurs-vergaderingen van het 
Bataviaasch Genootschap, Deel XXVIII: LXXI–
LXXII.
Kotyk, Jeffrey. 2017. Buddhist Astrology and Astral 
Magic in the Tang Dynasty. PhD dissertation, 
Leiden University.
. 2018. ‘Astrological Determinism in Indian 
Buddhism’, Journal of the International Asso-
ciation of Buddhist Studies 41: 145–167.
Kusen. 1994. ‘Raja-raja Mataram kuna dari Sañjaya 
sampai Balitung: sebuah rekonstruksi berdasar -
kan prasasti Wanua Tengah III’, Berkala Arke-
ologi 14: 82–95.
Kyōto Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan ( 京都国立博物
館). 1983. Kōbō Daishi to Mikkyō Bijutsu: Nyūjō 
1150-nen ( 弘法大師と密教美術: 入定 1150年). 
Tōkyō: Asahi Shinbunsha.
Lai, I-mann. 2006. The Famensi Reliquary Deposit: 
Icons of Esoteric Buddhism in Ninth-centu -
ry China. PhD dissertation, University of  
London.
Lamotte, Étienne. 2003a. ‘Vajrapāṇi in India (I)’, 
Buddhist Studies Review  20/1:  1–30.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   129 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 138] ---
Michel Gauvain130
. 2003b. ‘Vajrapāṇi in India (II)’, Buddhist 
Studies Review 20/2: 119–144.
Lang, Janet and Andrew Middleton (eds.). 2005. 
Radiography of Cultural Material. Oxford: El-
sevier Butterworth-Heinemann.
Le Bonheur, Albert. 1971. La sculpture indoné -
sienne uu Musée Guimet: catalogue et étude 
iconographique. Paris: Presses universitaires de  
France.
Leemans, Conradus. 1885. Beschrijving van de 
Indische oudheden van het Rijksmuseum van 
Oudheden te Leiden. Leiden.
Lehman, Eberhard H., S. Hartmann, and Markus 
O. Speidel. 2010. ‘Investigation of the Content 
of Ancient Tibetan Metallic Buddha Statues by 
Means of Neutron Imaging Methods’, Archae-
ometry 52/3: 416–428.
Lerner, Martin and Steven Kossak. 1991. The Lotus 
Transcendent: Indian and Southeast Asian Art 
from the Samuel Eilenberg Collection. New 
York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Lim, K.W. 1964. ‘Studies in later Buddhist ico -
nography’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 120: 327–341.
Linrothe, Robert N. 1990. ‘Beyond Sectarianism: 
Towards Reinterpreting the Iconography of 
Esoteric Buddhist Deities Trampling Hindu 
Gods’, Indian Journal of Buddhist Studies 2/2: 
16–25.
. 1992. Compassionate Malevolence: Wrath -
ful Deities in Esoteric Buddhist Art. PhD  
dissertation, University of Chicago.
. 1999. Ruthless Compassion: Wrathful 
Deities in Early Indo-Tibetan Esoteric Buddhist 
Art. London: Serindia Publications.
. 2000. ‘Delivering Threats, Threatening 
Deliverance: Forms and Functions in Indo-  
Tibetan Esoteric Buddhist Wrathful Deities: 
Part One’, Oriental Art 46/2: 24–35.
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, J.E. 1984. Indo-Javanese 
Metalwork. Stuttgart: Linden-Museum.
Lokesh Chandra. 1995. Cultural Horizons of India: 
Studies in Tantra and Buddhism, Art and Ar-
chaeology, Language and Literature, Vol. 4. 
New Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture and Aditya Prakashan.. 1999. Dictionary of Buddhist Iconography. 
New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. 
. 2013. Lord Śiva and Buddha in the Golden 
Isles: In Search of Classical Indonesia. New 
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture 
and Aditya Prakashan.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline C.M. 1994. ‘Bronze 
Images and their Place in Ancient Indonesian 
Culture’, in Marijke J. Klokke and Pauline 
Lunsingh Scheurleer (eds.), Ancient Indone -
sian Sculpture, pp. 76–114. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline C.M. and A.J. Bernet 
Kempers. 1985. Asiatic Art in the Rijksmuse -
um, Amsterdam. Amsterdam: Meulenhoff/
Landshoff in cooperation with the Vereniging 
van Vrienden der Aziatische Kunst and the 
Rijksmuseum.
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline C.M. and Marijke 
J. Klokke. 1988. Ancient Indonesian Bronzes: 
A Catalogue of the Exhibition in the Rijksmu-
seum Amsterdam with a General Introduction. 
Leiden: Brill.
Ly, Boreth. 2006. ‘Protecting the Protector of 
Phimai’, in Journal of the Walters Art Museum: 
A Special Issue. Curator’s Choice: Essays in 
Honor of Hiram W. Woodward, Jr., pp. 35–48. 
Baltimore: Walters Art Museum.
de Mallmann, Marie-Thérèse. 1986. Introduction 
à l’iconographie du Tântrisme Bouddhique. 
Paris: Librairie d’Amérique et d’Orient/Adrien  
Maisonneuve.
Matsunaga, Keiji ( 松長恵史 ). 1999. Indoneshia 
no Mikkyō ( インドネシアの密教 ). Kyōto: 
Hōzōkan.
Mechling, Mathilde. 2014. ‘Regard sur les statuettes 
hindoues et bouddhiques en bronze d’Indo-
nésie. Leur rôle pour la connaissance de la  
civilisation javanaise ancienne et ses liens avec 
l’Asie du Sud et du Sud-Est’, Les Cahiers de 
l’École du Louvre 5.
. 2018. ‘The Indonesian Bronze-Casting 
Tradition: Technical Investigations on Thir -
ty-Nine Indonesian Bronze Statues (7th–11th 
c.) from the Musée National des Arts Asiatiques 
– Guimet, Paris’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 104: 63–139.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   130 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 139] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains131
Mikkyō Jiten Hensankai ( 密教辞典編纂会 ). 2007. 
Mikkyō Daijiten (Shukusatsuban) ( 密教大辞典
縮刷版 ), 1 vol. Kyōto: Hōzōkan.
Miyata, Taisen ( 宮田諦詮 ) (ed.). 1988. Handbook 
on the Four Stages of Prayoga Chuin Branch of 
Shingon Tradition: Introduction and Commen -
tary. Kōyasan: Department of K ōyasan Shingon 
Foreign Mission.
Murphy, Stephen A. 2010. The Buddhist Bounda-
ry Markers of Northeast Thailand and Central 
Laos, 7th-12th Centuries CE: Towards an Un -
derstanding of the Archaeological, Religious and 
Artistic Landscapes of the Khorat Plateau . PhD 
dissertation, SOAS, University of London.
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 1990. Courtly Splen -
dor: Twelve Centuries of Treasures from Japan. 
Boston: Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
Nakamura, Hajime ( 中村元 ). 1981. Bukkyōgo 
daijiten ( 佛教語大辞典 ). Tōkyō: Tōkyō Shoseki 
(東京書籍 ).
Nara National Museum. 1988. The Grand Exhibi-
tion of Silk Road Civilizations: The Route of Bud -
dhist Art. Nara: Nara Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan.
Nath, Amarendra. 1986. Buddhist Images and 
Narratives. New Delhi: Books & Books.
Ogawa, Kōzō ( 小川光三 ) and Kōchō Nishimura 
(西村公朝 ). 1986–1987. Miwaku no butsuzō   
(魅惑の仏像 ), Vol. 11: Godai Myōō ( 五大明
王). Tōkyō: Mainichi Shinbunsha.
Okazaki, Joji ( 岡崎譲二 ). 1966. ‘Butsuzōrei shoken 
no Godai Myōō-zō – Enchin shorai zuzō to 
kanren’ ( 仏像鈴所顕の五大明王像-円珍請
来図像との関連 ). Bijutsu-shi ( 美術史 ), n. 61: 
18–32.
Orzech, Charles D. 1998. Politics and Transcendent 
Wisdom: The Scripture for Humane Kings in 
the Creation of Chinese Buddhism. University 
Park, Pa: Pennsylvania State University Press.
. 2006. ‘Looking for Bhairava: Exploring 
the Circulation of Esoteric Texts Produced  
by the Song Institute for Canonical Transla -
tion’, Pacific World Journal (Third Series) 8: 
139–166.
Orzech, Charles D., Henrik H. Sørensen, and 
Richard K. Payne. 2011. Esoteric Buddhism and 
the Tantras in East Asia. Leiden and Boston: 
Brill.Ōyama, Kōjun ( 大山公淳 ). 2017. Chūin-ryū no 
kenkyū ( 中院流の研究 ). Zōho kōtei ( 増補校
訂), Ōsaka: Tōhō Shuppan (first edition 1987).
Pal, Pratapaditya. 1975. Bronzes of Kashmir. New 
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
. 1982. A Buddhist Paradise: The Murals of 
Alchi, Western Himalayas. Vaduz: R. Kumar.
Paul-Gupta, Debjani. 2019. ‘A Terrifying Buddhist 
Image from Theravāda Thailand’, in Suraj 
Pandit, Manjiri Bhalerao, and Ambarish Khare 
(eds.), Pratnaratnam: Essays in Honour of Dr. 
Arvind Prabhakar Jamkhedkar, pp. 143–151. 
Pune: Samvidya Institute of Cultural Studies.
Pleyte, C.M. 1901. ‘Bijdrage tot de kennis van 
het Mahâyâna op Java. Opmerkingen naar 
aanleidingvan Grünwedel’s “Mythologie du 
Buddhisme au Tibet et en Mongolie”’, Bijdra-
gen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch-Indië 52/1–2: 362–380.
. 1902. ‘Bijdrage tot de kennis van het 
Mahâyâna op Java’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië  
54/1–2: 195–202.
Raffles, Thomas Stamford. 1994. Plates to Raffles’s 
History of Java. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Ricca, Franco and Erberto Lo Bue. 1993. The Great 
Stupa of Gyantse: A Complete Tibetan Pantheon 
of the Fifteenth Century. London: Serindia.
Saraswati, S.K. 1977. Tantrayana Art: An Album. 
Calcutta: Asiatic Society.
Sarkar, Himansu Bhusan. 1971–1972. Corpus of 
the Inscriptions of Java (Corpus Inscriptionum 
Javanicarum), up to 928 A.D., 2 vols. Calcutta: 
Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay.
Śaśibālā. 1986. Comparative Iconography of the 
Vajradhātu-Maṇḍala and the Tattva-Saṅgraha, 
pp. 66–68. New Delhi: Sharada Rani.
Sekine, Shun’ichi ( 関根俊一 ). 2011. ‘Kongōrei to 
Kongōsho’ ( 金剛鈴と金剛杵 ). Nihon no Bijutsu 
(日本の美術 ), no. 541 (June).
Sharf, Robert H. 2011. ‘The Buddha’s Finger Bones 
at Famensi and the Art of Chinese Esoteric 
Buddhism’. The Art Bulletin 93/1: 38–59.
Sharma, Sudhakar. 2004. The Heritage of Buddhist 
Pāla Art. New Delhi: Aryan Books Interna -
tional.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   131 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 140] ---
Michel Gauvain132
Sharrock, Peter. 2022. ‘Heruka-Maṇḍalas across 
Maritime Asia’, in Andrea Acri and Peter Shar -
rock (eds.), The Creative South: Buddhist and 
Hindu Art in Mediaeval Maritime Asia, Volume 
One, pp. 126–164. Singapore: ISEAS – Yusof 
Ishak Institute.
Skorupski, Tadeusz. 1983. The Sarvadurgati -
pariśodhana Tantra: Elimination of All Evil 
Destinies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Snellgrove, David L. 1987. Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: 
Indian Buddhists and Their Tibetan Successors, 
pp. 134–141. London: Serindia.
Snodgrass, Adrian. 1988. The Matrix and Diamond 
World Mandalas in Shingon Buddhism. New 
Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
. 1992. The Symbolism of the Stupa. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Soper, Alexander C. 1966. Chinese, Korean and 
Japanese Bronzes: A Catalogue of the Auriti 
Collection Donated to IsMEO and Preserved in 
the Museo Nazionale d’Arte Orientale in Rome. 
Serie Orientale Roma XXXV. Roma: Istituto 
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente.
Sørensen, Henrik H. 2011. ‘Central Divinities in 
the Esoteric Buddhist Pantheon in China’, in 
Charles D. Orzech, Henrik H. Sørensen, and 
Richard K. Payne, Esoteric Buddhism and the 
Tantras in East Asia, pp. 90–132. Leiden and 
Boston: Brill.
Stein, Rolf A. 1973. ‘Étude du monde chinois: ins-
titutions and concepts’, Annuaire du Collège 
de France 73: 457–470.
Stutterheim, Willem F. 1932. ‘Van een tjaṇḍi, 
een grottempel en een oorkonde’, Djåwå 12: 
292–303.
Sundberg, Jeffrey R. 2003. ‘A Buddhist Mantra 
Recovered from the Ratu Baka Plateau; a 
Preliminary Study of its Implications for 
Śailendra-era Java’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 159/1: 163–188.
. 2006. ‘Considerations on the Dating of 
the Barabuḍur Stūpa’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 162/1: 95–132.
. 2011. ‘The Old Sundanese Carita Para-  
hyangan, King Warak and the Fracturing of 
the Javanese Polity, c. 803 A.D.’, in ManjuShree (ed.), From Beyond the Eastern Horizon: Essays 
in Honour of Professor Lokesh Chandra,  
pp. 143–157. New Delhi: Aditya Prakarshan.
. 2016. ‘Mid-9th-Century Adversity for 
Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in Java: 
Lord Kumbhayoni and the “Rag-wearer” 
Paṁsukūlika Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra’, 
in Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in 
Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons, pp. 349–379. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.
Swearer, Donald K. 2004. Becoming the Buddha: 
The Ritual of Image Consecration in Thailand. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Takakusu, Junjirō ( 高楠順次郎 ) and Genmyō 
Ono ( 小野玄妙 ). 1932–1934. Taishō shinshū  
Daizōkyō zuzō ( 大正新修大藏經圖像 ). Tōkyō: 
Daizō Shuppan.
Tanaka, Kimiaki ( 田中公明 ). 2018. An Illustrated 
History of the Maṇḍala: From its Genesis to 
the Kālacakratantra. Somerville, MA: Wisdom 
Publications.
Tsuji, Nobuo ( 辻惟雄 ), Takeo Izumi ( 泉武夫 ), Yūji 
Yamashita ( 山下裕二 ), and Masaaki Itakura  
(板倉聖哲 ). 2012–2016. Nihon bijutsu zenshū 
(日本美術全集 ), 20 vols. Tōkyō: Shōgakukan 
(小学館 ).
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1932. Indo-tibetica, pp. 135–145. 
Roma: Reale accademia d’Italia.
. 1989. Gyantse and Its Monasteries: part 3, 
plates. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
Wang, Michelle C. 2018. Maṇḍalas in the Making: 
The Visual Culture of Esoteric Buddhism at 
Dunhuang. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Whitfield, Roderick. 1982–1983. The Art of Central 
Asia: The Stein Collection in the British Museum, 
Vol. 1. Tokyo: Kodansha International in co-
operation with the Trustees of the British 
Museum.
Wisseman Christie, Jan. 2000. Register of the 
Inscription of Java—from 732 to 1060; part I: 
732 to 898 A.D. (Consultation Draft).
With, Karl. 1920. Java: Brahmanische, Buddhis -
tische und Eigenlebige Architektur und Plastik 
auf Java. Hagen: Folkwang Verlag.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   132 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 141] ---
The Cult of Trailokyavijaya in Java Studied Through the Lens of Epigraphical and Sculptural Remains133
Woodward, Hiram. 2004. ‘A Review Article: 
Esoteric Buddhism in Southeast Asia in 
the Light of Recent Scholarship’, Journal of 
Southeast Asian Studies 35/2: 329–354.
. 2005. The Art and Architecture of Thailand: 
From Prehistoric Times Through the Thirteenth 
Century, 2nd ed. Leiden and Boston: Brill.
. 2015. ‘Aspects of Buddhism in Tenth-
Century Cambodia’, in D. Christian Lammerts, 
Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern and Early 
Modern Southeast Asia. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.Yamasaki, Miho ( 山﨑美保 ). 2018. 中部ジャワ時
代の社会と王‐ 9世紀から10世紀初めの古ジ
ャワ語刻文からの考察  (The Kingship and the 
Structure of Old Javanese Society: Analysis from 
Old Javanese Inscriptions in the 9th and the 
Early 10th Centuries). Doctoral thesis, Tokyo 
University of Foreign Studies.
Zonneveld, Albert G. van. 2001. Traditional 
Weapons of the Indonesian Archipelago. Leiden: 
C. Zwartenkot Art Books.
06_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   133 29/7/22   3:14 PM

--- [Page 142] ---
Chapter 7
The Social Context of the Central Javanese Temples 
of Kalasan and Prambanan  
(8th–9th Century CE)
Mimi Savitri
introduction
The Buddhist temple of Kalasan and the the Hindu 
complex of Prambanan (or Lara Jonggrang) lie 3 
km apart in the eastern part of the city of Yogy-
akarta in Central Java (see Map 7.1). Art historians 
have often focused on the aesthetic and religious 
aspects of these two temples, which, along with 
Borobudur, took Javanese sacred art to its apogee 
in the 8th and 9th centuries CE. For instance, Jor -
daan’s studies of Kalasan proposed a link between 
the Buddhist goddess Śyāma-Tārā (Green Tārā) 
with Nyai Lara Kidul, the Javanese deity of the 
Southern Sea (Jordaan 1997, 1998); Jordaan and 
Wessing investigated possible human sacrifice 
rituals in Central Java on the basis of a human 
skeleton reportedly found in Prambanan (Jordaan 
and Wessing 1996: 45), concluding that human 
sacrifices might have emerged from a syncretic 
adaptation of an Indic royal cult and indigenous 
Javanese ancestral beliefs (ibid.: 69); Acri and 
Jordaan identified reliefs of 24 seated male deities 
that form Śiva’s retinue at Prambanan temple 
(Acri and Jordaan 2012: 274), thereby deepening 
our grasp of the Śaiva cosmological notions em-
bedded in the design of the complex. Adding to 
these insights, this chapter looks for traces of the 
social life forming the context for those Central 
Javanese sacred buildings, following the view that 
the architecture of monuments points beyond 
itself to the totality of its social context (Leah 2002: 
125, 134).
Butzer (1980: 418) argued that archaeology, 
artifacts, and their social context are the basic 
ingredients for more accurately disclosing life in the past. This chapter studies the epigraphy of 
the Kalasan and Prambanan temple complexes to 
uncover traces of the social life of the Javanese in 
the 8th and 9th centuries. The massive construction 
effort required to erect the Kalasan and Prambanan 
temples was the result of the political elite, the 
religious leaders, and the general public forming 
a dynamic and interactive support network that 
combined and focused the various groups’ abili -
ties and skills to achieve unprecedented heights in 
sacred art and architecture. 
This chapter asks how the temples of Kalasan 
and Prambanan were initiated and executed, and 
how they were maintained. Research on the temple 
construction process from the beginning to the 
end, as well as on the efforts to maintain the sus-
tainability of the two temples in the 8th and 9th 
century, can help us to determine the position and 
role of the Javanese community in the creation 
and maintenance of both temples, as well as their 
social life. 
Two inscriptions contain valuable data on the 
human context of the two constructions: the Kalasan 
inscription (in Sanskrit) dated 778 CE, related to 
the eponymous temple, and the Śivagṛha inscrip-
tion (in Old Javanese) of 856 CE, related to Candi 
Prambanan. Both inscriptions, which are now kept 
in the Museum Nasional in Jakarta, provide us with 
much more than just the names of the kings and 
the dates of their reigns, mentioning as they do 
some interesting aspects of the life of the society 
around the temples (Barret Jones 1984: 8). Apart 
from defining their role in relation to Śaiva and 
Buddhist deities, both inscriptions contain some 
details that cast light on the communities around 
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   134 24/6/22   4:00 PM

--- [Page 143] ---
The Social Context of the Central Javanese Temples of Kalasan and Prambanan135
Map 7.1: Location of Kalasan and Śivagṛha/Prambanan temples in Java. (Map redrawn by Ainul Yaqin, accessed 
from https://tanahair.indonesia.go.id/portal-web/)
the temples who were involved in their construc-
tion, operation, and maintenance. The inscriptional 
data is analysed here using a contextual approach. 
Deriving from the Latin verb contexere meaning 
‘to weave together’ or ‘connect’, the word ‘context’ 
here renders the spatial temporal matrix related 
to the central cultural artifacts (Butzer 1980: 418). 
The history of religious architecture of the 
premodern Indonesian Archipelago began when 
streams of Hindu and Buddhist doctrine and 
ritual practice influenced the religious and so -
cio-cultural life of the Archipelago starting from 
the early centuries of the first millennium CE. A 
Sanskrit inscription written in a South Indian/
Brāhmī-derived script found in Kutai, Eastern 
Kalimantan, introduced the concept of a yūpa 
or ‘sacrificial post’ inscription. Seven such yūpas 
mark the early history of Indic epigraphy in the 
Archipelago. Indic influence, received by Javanese 
culture, reached its peak in the 8th and 9th centu-ries. Klokke calls the magnificent architecture of 
Kalasan and Prambanan as derivative of Indic art, 
yet strongly localized (Klokke 2008: 154). The style 
of both temples is unique, with no exact model to 
be found in India.
the kalasan temple and its  
inscription
The Kalasan temple constitutes a complete and 
finished example of a style of architecture that 
resulted from a long Indic tradition of structural 
experience in the design of major public buildings 
(see Fig. 7.1). The temple that is visible today is 
not the original one, as the earliest building was 
covered by a later construction (Degroot 2013: 115). 
The second temple, which is seen today, was in its 
turn renovated, probably in the course of the 9th 
century ( ibid.: 115). 
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   135 24/6/22   4:00 PM

--- [Page 144] ---
Mimi Savitri136
The Kalasan temple has several notable features. 
Judging from the height of the ceiling, it probably 
hosted a colossal statue measuring up to four 
metres in height. The design of the large throne 
indicates that a large (bronze?) seated image of 
the Buddhist goddess Tārā was probably placed 
there (Soekmono 1988: 43). The statue is missing, 
having been probably looted. The volcanic stone 
walls were covered with a fine, hard plaster known 
as vajralepa, 1 much of which has been lost to the 
tropical climate. Today, a major feature is a large 
face of the demon Kāla/Kīrtimukha, who embodies 
Time, located above the southern doorway (see 
Fig. 7.2). There is consensus among art historians 
in acknowledging Kalasan as one of the finest 
Javanese temples datable to the 8th century. 
The Kalasan inscription (known by the locals as 
prasasti Kalasan) is made of stone, and measures 
46 cm in height, 67 cm in width, and 12 cm in 
thickness (Fig. 7.3). This inscription, written in 
Siddhamātṛkā script and Sanskrit language, states 
that the monument was dedicated to Tārādevī, 
being a Tārābhavana (‘palace of Tārā’) (Wisse -
man Christie 2000: 16). Having been found at the 
1. The colour of vajralepa was white-yellowish and its 
function was to protect the walls.
Fig. 7.1: Kalasan temple. (Photo courtesy of Yoses Tanzaq)
Fig. 7.2: A large Kāla-head carved on the lintel above the 
southern entrance of Candi Kalasan. (Photo courtesy 
of Yoses Tanzaq)
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   136 24/6/22   4:00 PM

--- [Page 145] ---
The Social Context of the Central Javanese Temples of Kalasan and Prambanan137
Candi Kalasan site, it is undoubtedly related to 
the temple, and it commemorates its erection in 
778 CE at the command of the court gurus, after 
they obtained the approval of the king referred 
to as Saṅ Rāja Śailendravaṃśatilaka (‘jewel of the 
Śailendra family’)—identified as Mahārāja Dyah 
Pañcapaṇa Kariyāna Paṇaṃkaraṇa (or Rakarayān 
Paṇaṅkaran, mentioned in the Kәlurak inscription 
of 782 CE). 
The inscription also attests to the establishment 
of a vihāra (monastery) for the venerable monks 
(bhikṣu) who are well-versed in the Great Vehicle 
and the Discipline (vinayamahāyānavidām),2 and 
the donation of the hamlet named Kālasa (i.e., what 
is nowadays known as Kalasan) to support the 
saṅgha housed in the vihāra (Soekmono 1995: 54). 
Alongside this rare mention of high-status monks 
in a temple dedication inscription, we also find a 
reference to other administrative officers: the abode 
for the monks was built by the powerful religious 
teachers of the king, and the officials named paṅkur, 
tavān, and tīrip (Wisseman Christie 2000: 14) are 
mentioned as witnesses to the hamlet’s donation. 
This trio is regularly mentioned in the list of of -
2. Alternatively, this could be an ‘inverted compound’, 
meaning ‘well-versed in the vinaya of the Mahāyāna’?
Fig. 7.3: Kalasan inscription (Photo courtesy of Museum Nasional Indonesia)
ficials in the later period (Barret Jones 1984: 105), 
and usually precedes the Javanese tax farmers in 
the lists of royal officers presented in Javanese char -
ters. In the Siṅhasāri period (13th century) they are 
classified as saṅ mana or king’s advisors, which 
include the group of maṅilala dravya haji.  Paṅkur, 
tavān, and tīrip were involved in tax collection, 
perhaps on behalf of the rakryan (local leader) or 
the king (ibid.).
the prambanan temple and the  
śivagṛha inscription
Prambanan is a magnificent Śaiva temple complex, 
whose elegant 47-metre towers are dedicated to 
the trimūrti  of Śiva, Viṣṇu, and Brahmā (Fig. 7.4). 
The central sanctuary, dedicated to Śiva, is now 
locally known as Candi Loro Jonggrang, being 
named after a mythical princess. The construction 
of the complex constitutes a pivotal event in the 
history of the sacred architecture of Java. It can be 
tentatively dated to the middle of the 9th century, 
after Kalasan, and both marks the apex of Central 
Javanese classical art and foreshadows subsequent 
East Javanese art (Degroot 2013: 22). 
The Śivagṛha inscription, a rare Old Javanese 
epigraphic document composed in metrical form, 
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   137 24/6/22   4:00 PM

--- [Page 146] ---
Mimi Savitri138
was issued by King Dyah Lokapāla, also known as 
Rakai Kayuvaṅi (r.c. 855–885).3 Dated to 856 CE, 
it has been studied in detail by de Casparis (1956), 
and has also been extensively discussed by other 
scholars, mainly for two reasons: first, it makes 
allusions to important socio-historical events that 
took place in Central Java at the turn of the first half 
of the 9th century; second, it features stylistic and 
thematic similarities with the allegorical chapters 
of the—probably roughly coeval—Old Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa  kakavin  (Hooykaas 1958; Aichele 1969; 
Acri 2010, 2011). No less importantly, it describes a 
temple which resembles the main sanctuary of the 
Prambanan complex (Fig. 7.5). The construction 
of the temple undoubtedly took several years and 
was most probably initiated long before the reign 
of Dyah Lokapāla (Degroot 2013: 22). Lokapāla or 
Rakai Kayuvaṅi may have been a relative of his 
predecessor Rakai Pikatan (r.c. 847–855), king of 
Mataram, whose queen was a Buddhist (Boechari 
2012: 200).
3.  King Lokapāla was a king of the Old Mataram Kingdom, 
a Central Javanese polity that emerged around the end of 
the 7th century and lasted until the 10th century (Degroot 
2013: 18). Rakai is the title of a Javanese leader who occupied 
a certain area.
Fig. 7.4: Prambanan temple complex. (Photo: author)
Fig. 7.5: Śivagṛha inscription. (Photo courtesy of 
Museum Nasional Indonesia)
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   138 24/6/22   4:00 PM

--- [Page 147] ---
The Social Context of the Central Javanese Temples of Kalasan and Prambanan139
The Śivagṛha inscription speaks of a Śaiva 
king—probably Rakai Pikatan—as the protector 
of Java, who defeated an opponent named Bālapu -
tra in a war over the throne. He built his palace 
at Mәḍaṅ i Mamrati and on his death the throne 
was passed to his successor Dyah Lokapāla. In the 
eulogy to the deceased king, the inscription says 
his funerals were performed in the complex. It 
mentions a sīma grant of two tampah4 of huma  
(a wet rice field) in Tri Maharaṅ, a sawah field, 
and a patalәsan (taro) field at Maṇḍәr Duṭī in 
Katamva, for the upkeep of the Śaiva sanctuary by 
Rakai Mamrati.  The inscription speaks of a river 
that flowed through the site being diverted and 
of a tīrtha or holy bathing place, where vaniyaga s 
(seafaring merchants) bathed in order to bring 
success (siddha ta yātra) to their ventures (de 
Casparis 1956: 311–316). The tradition of bathing 
in the river, and especially in river junctions, still 
continues in Java until today—for instance, it 
is done by the Javanese as a ritual procedure to 
achieve any worldly desires.
the establishment of kalasan and 
prambanan temples
The process of the establishment of both temples, 
from the beginning to the end, involved several 
parties. Those involved were the kings, the kings’ 
religious teachers, as well as those who built the 
temples. The interaction between these parties was 
dynamic, as explained below.
Kings and gurus
Kalasan and Prambanan were both royal foun -
dations. Verse 11 of the Śivagṛha inscription says 
that the king established a dharma (i.e. a temple 
or religious foundation). As noted above, the 
Kalasan inscription was ordered by eminent Bud -
dhist teachers who had obtained the approval of 
their king, whose status made him closely aligned 
with the gods and conferred upon him the duty 
to sponsor the temple.
4. The tampah was an ancient Javanese unit of measure-
ment, equal to 6,750–7,680 square metres.The community of gurus or teachers to the 
king played a key role at Kalasan and Prambanan. 
At Kalasan the king obeyed the request of the 
gurus, who are referred to as having a high social 
status. This fact highlights the classical Hindu-
Buddhist pattern of a close bond between the 
priestly and ruling classes aimed at achieving a 
stable society through a division of labour between 
sacred and secular power (Degroot 2013: 37). The 
importance of the guru’s role in a realm also 
can be seen in the above-mentioned stone yūpa  
inscription found in Kutai dating from the 5th 
or 6th century. The inscription mentions King 
Mūlavarman’s gift of 2,000 cows to Brahmins 
for merit. In return, the Brahmins established a 
monument to commemorate the kindness of the 
king (Poerbatjaraka 1952: 11).
The functions of a vihāra in ancient Java were 
described by Riboet Darmosoetopo (2003), who 
states that temples are clusters of buildings that 
function as both religious structures and dormi -
tories (ibid.: 204). The existence of monasteries is 
mentioned throughout the Central Javanese period 
(see, for example, the Vayuku inscription of 854 
CE). The Kalasan inscription refers to the building 
of both a Tārā temple and an abode for the monks. 
Monasteries, such as the one at Kalasan, served the 
community with rituals, prayers, and ceremonies. 
Large monasteries might have provided some form 
of education. In Tibet, some monasteries focused 
on retreats and meditation practice, while others 
served administrative functions and attracted dif-
ferent types of monks (Jansen 2018: 47). An anal-
ogous distinction could have also been observed 
in premodern Central Java.
The builders
Large numbers of builders played various roles in 
the construction of both temples. They probably 
included both experts as well as common people, 
who provided the necessary workforce. Javanese 
architects likely determined the best place to 
erect the temple complex according to Sanskrit 
manuals such as the Mānasāra-śilpaśāstra  and 
Śilpa-prakāśa  (Mundardjito 2002: 17). According 
to both texts, the architect should choose an ap -
propriate location and environment for a temple 
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   139 24/6/22   4:00 PM

--- [Page 148] ---
Mimi Savitri140
(ibid.). Then a very large number of masons and 
śilpin s would begin the work to erect it. 
Ancillary Buildings: monastery, panti , and 
rangkang
That temples built on a given site did not stand 
alone can be clearly seen in the areas where the 
Kalasan and Prambanan temples are located. In 
both sites the main buildings are surrounded by 
some additional buildings such as monasteries, 
panti , and raṅkaṅ.
The Javanese King Panaṅkaran built a monastery 
close to the temple of Kalasan for the residence and 
meditation of the bhikṣus, while Rakai Kayuvaṅi 
Dyah Lokapāla built panti s (fellowship pavilions?) 
for the Brahmins. Panti pavilions accommodated 
ascetic practices (tapas) and a number of them 
were constructed around the central abode of the 
deity (Wisseman Christie 2000: 96). Two smaller 
buildings called raṅkaṅ were built as stations 
for making offerings, according to the Śivagṛha 
inscription. 
Indications of what the panti looked like can 
perhaps be gleaned from columns found at the 
so-called ‘Arjuna temple’ complex on the ca. 8th 
century mountain temples of the Dieng plateau 
(Figs. 7.6 and 7.7). Short stone columns recovered 
in archaeological contexts in the site are thought 
to be foundations of pavilions for Brahmins, pil-
grims, and hermits that resided at the mountain 
site to study. 
Temple Maintenance
The maintenance and preservation of Javanese 
temples depended on three factors: securing the 
tax advantages of sīma  status for their land; assem -
bling large group of devotees for regular worship; 
and recruiting doorkeepers for security. A calendar 
of regular festivals to invite the gods to descend on 
earth for frequent veneration was key to sustaining 
a functioning, living temple. 
The Śivagṛha inscription (verse 13) states that 
the temple was built in a spirit of mutual coopera-
tion, involving both high-status people, common-
ers, and servants, all contributing to the donation 
and the building activities (probably also referring to the smaller subsidiary buildings, which were 
usually donated by nobles). Stanza 18 says that the 
complex attracted hundreds of worshippers. Along 
with the local communities (anak banua) there 
were sea-faring merchants (vaniyaga), religious 
communities (kalaṅ), and handsome gusti (village 
lords?). All were instructed to wear ceremonial 
headbands (kavittha) when worshipping at the 
temple. On feast days for worshipping the divine 
beings (maṅhyaṅ), people filled the temple and 
the ancillary pavilions with offerings. Such cere-
monies could have been regularly scheduled at the 
Prambanan temple. There was a precise calendar 
of daily services (Wisseman Christie 2000: 98), 
monthly ceremonies (pratimāsa), biannual turning 
point ceremonies, and yearly feasts held in specific 
months (Boechari 2012: 282). 
At Kalasan, a triad of foremost ministers known 
as saṅ ādimantri tama tritaya (three great min -
isters), which appear to be similar in function to 
the sang mahāmantri katrini in the later period 
of the Mataram Kingdom (9th century CE), also 
worshipped in Tārā’s temple. The Mahāmantri 
katrini were higher officials who were always men -
tioned together in the lists of officials found in the 
inscriptions (Barret Jones 1984: 105). They were 
probably delegated with the task of collecting taxes 
on behalf of the king (ibid.). Monks, young men 
and women went to the temples with their teachers, 
many of whom were counted among temple pro-
tectors of various kinds, as well as astrologers. The 
Prambanan temple was protected by human guards 
and fierce mythical statuary guards or dvārapālas, as well as surrounding walls (Wisseman Christie 
2000: 96). The Śivagṛha inscription (stanza 14) 
states: ‘There are fierce doorkeepers […] so that 
thieves will not do evil for fear of being seized’. 
Sīma status for both temples
The temples’ most effective form of protection was 
the bestowal of tax-free and holy sīma  status to 
the land where they stood. Sīma  (boundary) is 
a special status that may be granted by a king or 
another ruler (Riboet Darmosoetopo 2003: 96). 
Among the people involved in establishing the 
sīma  are the samgat vantil  (religious official) with 
all their nayaka  and patih officials. The nayaka  
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   140 24/6/22   4:01 PM

--- [Page 149] ---
The Social Context of the Central Javanese Temples of Kalasan and Prambanan141
Fig. 7.6: Columns forming the foundation of panti/pavilion in the Arjuna temple complex in 
Dieng. (Photo: author)
Fig. 7.7: Reconstruction of a panti or pavilion, an open building for hermits to study and meditate, 
or for the preparation of temple offerings. (Photo: author)
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   141 24/6/22   4:01 PM

--- [Page 150] ---
Mimi Savitri142
is a court official that played an important role 
in sīma ’s ceremonies and held various functions 
as well as titles (Barret Jones 1984: 108). The patih  
is a functionary that connected to villages. He 
had several functions, which are mentioned in 
several inscriptions. For instance, he could become 
a witness for neighbouring villages at the inaugu -
ration ceremony of a sīma . Another official who 
played an active role in the establishment of sīma s 
was also the gusti , a village-level official who was 
a role model for the village community. 
In the Śivagṛha inscription, the patihs  are called 
si Kliṅ and si Mresi5; the three gustis were si Jana, 
si Kandut and si Sanab. A banyaga 6 (trader) is 
described as the vinәkas  (‘he who receives orders’); 
the vahutas (court officials) were Varaniya, Tati 
and Vukul; the laduh (unknown function) was si  
Gnәṅ. The spokesmen or experts with words were 
Kabuh and saṅ Marsi, who represented the village 
advisory council (rāma maratā) (Ninie Susanti 
2010: 127). Rāma maratā consisted in rāmas who 
had retired.7 They, then, bestowed the sīma, to -
gether with the matahun (local official) called si  
Kavit (Wisseman Christie 2000: 97). 
Sīma land is designated as special land, whose  
status benefitted the local population. By marking 
an area with sīma boundaries, it was declared 
not accessible to the tax officials, and the head 
of the sīma had the right to collect taxes in his 
area (Riboet Darmosoetopo 2003: 96–97). Apart 
from this economic assistance to residents, the 
status of sīma provided some maintenance for a 
temple (ibid.: xv). The sīma status guaranteed the 
sustainability of a temple and its revenues from 
the crops as well as a reduction in taxes. Sīma land 
may consist of rice fields that were sold or used by 
the head(s) of a temple to support its functioning 
and maintenance. The rice fields or savah Maharaṅ 
(vatak  Vantil) around the Prambanan temple were 
the sīma savah that enabled the existence and 
functioning of the sanctuary (Wisseman Christie 
2000: 95). The revenues to maintain the continuous 
5. The title ‘si’ followed by a personal name indicates the 
name of a villager.
6. Banyaga were (possibly long-distance, foreign) traders. 
Alternatively, here the word can be a proper name since it 
is preceded by si.
7.  Rāma is the leader of villagers.functionality of a temple did not only derive from 
the rice fields, but also from gardens, as referred 
to in the Juruṅan inscription (876 CE) (Riboet 
Darmosoetopo et al. 2012). 
The Juruṅan inscription of 876 CE records a 
sīma garden (taman) located around the main 
religious building (prāsāda)  in Gunuṅ Hyaṅ to 
support its existence (Riboet Darmosoetopo et al. 
2012: 13). The fruits and flowers from the garden 
were used for the ritual activities in the temple 
(Mimi Savitri 2019). The existence of a sīma garden 
also improved the appearance and attractiveness 
of Central Javanese temples. Although the sīma  
garden played a not insignificant role to ensure 
the sustainability of a temple, the yield was greater 
in the case of the rice fields that were used as sīma 
savah. It is therefore not surprising that sīma status 
was given more frequently to rice fields rather 
than gardens. 
The person responsible for the maintenance of 
the temple was the head of the sīma land. The head 
of the sīma was also responsible for distributing 
the proceeds of the business tax, one third being 
destined to the upkeep of the religious buildings 
(Riboet Darmosoetopo 2003: 161). The sīma status 
is usually conferred by the king and is seen as a 
gift to the residents who are rewarded for meeting 
their obligations to support and manage the temple 
by meeting the costs of serving food and holding 
ceremonies for the deities (ibid.: 15).
The social life around Kalasan and Prambanan 
temples in the light of inscriptions
The social life of the people related to the function -
ing of a temple in the 8th–9th century CE is re -
vealed through the Kalasan and Śivagṛha inscrip -
tions, albeit in different capacities. For example, 
the Kalasan inscription provides less information 
relating to social life than the latter, but tells us 
more about the king’s power and the relationship 
between the king and his teachers. This seems to be 
a common characteristic of the inscriptions from 
the early period of Hindu and Buddhist influence 
in Indonesia, from the 5th to the 8th century CE. 
As a result, not much information about the social 
and community life can be gathered. On the other 
hand, the Śivagṛha inscription provides more in -
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   142 24/6/22   4:01 PM

--- [Page 151] ---
The Social Context of the Central Javanese Temples of Kalasan and Prambanan143
formation related to community life at the time 
when the Prambanan temple was founded. 
Research on both inscriptions gives us clues 
on the social hierarchy of the community at that 
time. The king had the highest status among the 
people. His teachers were the persons who played 
a most important role as his advisors. This is also 
suggested by the fact that the establishment of the 
Kalasan temple is by order of the king’s teachers. 
The great ministers and court dignitaries were also 
mentioned on both inscriptions, as also the maṅila -
la dravya haji, royal tax collectors or ‘undesirable’ 
people who was forbidden to enter religious free-
holds, and whose duty was to manage the king’s 
property.
The Javanese polity also acknowledged mid -
dle-level royal officials such as nayakas and vahutas, 
and low-ranking employees. These officials also 
played a role in the construction of temples and 
in maintaining their sustainability in Java in the 
8th–9th century CE. 
conclusion
A study of the details of Central Javanese dedica -
tory inscriptions reveals some of the interactive 
relationships in the communities that make up 
social life around monuments. The king and his 
teachers played important roles when instigating 
the foundation of temples structures, as well as 
planning and erecting them.
Kings, as supreme rulers of their subjects, pos-
sessed authority to commit them to build temples. 
The king’s teachers and priests were then critical 
advisors for specifying the location, the physical 
structure, and the ceremonial calendar. Archi -
tects and masons then drew detailed plans, and 
procured the sources materials and manpower to 
execute the construction. Finally, the evidently 
gifted śilpins added their unique and celebrated 
artistic contribution. 
The Kalasan and Prambanan temples attracted 
not only the local inhabitants—including children, 
banua (villagers), and gusti (local dignitaries), who 
contributed to the building, but also seafaring 
merchants (vaniyaga), pilgrims, and relatively 
isolated religious communities (kalaṅ). Gate-  keepers (whether human or sculpted) were added 
to protective walls to guard the temples over time.
The strongest guarantee of a monument’s 
upkeep remained the grant of sīma status that 
returned business taxes to the temple authorities. 
The massive construction effort required for these 
two strikingly different monuments, underpinning 
different religious creeds, brought together the 
elite, religious leaders, craftsmen, and the general 
public in a dynamic and interactive community 
that combined and focused the abilities and skills of 
all in reaching wholly unprecedented achievements 
in the sacred art and architecture of both South 
and Southeast Asia.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2010. ‘On Birds, Ascetics, and Kings 
in Central Java: Rāmāyaṇa Kakawin, 24.95–126 
and 25’, Bijdragen Tot de Taal-, Land- En Volk -
enkunde 166/4: 475–506. 
. 2011. ‘More on Birds, Ascetics, and Kings 
in Central Java: Kakawin Rāmāyaṇa, 24.111–115 
and 25.19–22’, in Andrea Acri, Helen Creese, 
and Arlo Griffiths (eds.), From Laṅkā East -
wards: The Rāmāyaṇa in the Literature and 
Visual Arts of Indonesia, pp. 53–91. Leiden: 
KITLV Press.
Acri, Andrea and Roy Jordaan. 2012. ‘The Dikpālas 
of Ancient Java Revisited: A New Identification 
for the 24 Directional Deities on the Siva 
Temple of the Loro Jonggrang Complex’, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-en Volkenkunde  
168/2–3: 274–313.
Aichele, Walter. 1969. ‘Vergessene Metaphern als 
Kriterien der Datierung des altjavanischen 
Rāmāyaṇa’, Oriens Extremus 16: 127–166. 
Barret Jones, Antoinette M. 1984. Early Tenth 
Century Java from the Inscriptions. Dordrecht: 
Foris Publications.
Boechari. 2012. Melacak Sejarah Kuno Indonesia 
Lewat Prasasti. Jakarta: KPG.
Brown, Percy. 1942. Indian Architecture (Buddhist 
and Hindu period). 2nd edition. Bombay: D.B. 
Taraporevala Sons & Co.
Butzer, Karl W. 1980. ‘Context in Archaeology: 
An Alternative Perspective’, Journal of Field 
Archaeology 7/4 (Winter): 417–422.
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   143 24/6/22   4:01 PM

--- [Page 152] ---
Mimi Savitri144
de Casparis, Johannes G. 1956. Selected Inscriptions 
from the 7th to the 9th Century A.D. (Prasasti 
Indonesia II). Bandung: Masa Baru.
Degroot, Véronique. 2013. Magical Prambanan. 
Prambanan: PT Taman Wisata Candi Boro -
budur, Prambanan & Ratu Boko.
Hooykaas, Christiaan. 1958.  ‘From Lĕnṅkā to 
Ayodhyā by Puṣpaka, being the Old-Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa sarga XXV mainly’, Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 114: 359–383. 
Jansen, Berthe. 2018. The Monastery Rules: Buddhist 
Monastic Organization in Pre-Modern Tibet. 
California: University of California Press.
Jordaan, Roy E. 1997. ‘Tara and Nyai Lara Kidul: 
Images of the Divine Feminine in Java’, Asian 
Folklore Studies 456/2: 285–312.
Jordaan, Roy E. and Robert Wessing. 1996. ‘Human 
Sacrifice at Prambanan’, Bijdragen tot de taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 152/1: 45–73. 
. ‘The Tārā temple of Kalasan in Central 
Java’, Bulletin de l’École française d'Ex -
trême-Orient  85: 163–183.
Klokke, Marijke. 2008. ‘The Buddhist Temples of 
the Sailendra Dynasty in Central Java’, Arts 
Asiatiques 63: 154–167.Leah, Neil (ed.). 2002. Rethinking Architecture. 
London: Routledge.
Mimi Savitri. 2019. ‘Taman sīma pada prāsāda di 
Gunung Hyang (Jawa abad IX M)’, Naditira 
Widya 13/1: 13–24. 
Mundardjito. 2002. Pertimbangan ekologis pen -
empatan situs masa Hindu-Buda di daerah 
Yogyakarta. Jakarta: Wedatama Widya Sastra. 
Ninie Susanti. 2010. Airlangga: Biografi raja 
pembaru Jawa abad XI. Yogyakarta: Komu -
nitas Bambu.
Poerbatjaraka. 1952. Riwajat Indonesia I. Jakarta: 
Yayasan Pembangunan Djakarta.
Riboet Darmosoetopo. 2003. Sima dan bangunan 
keagamaan di Jawa abad IX–X TU. Yogyakarta: 
Penerbit Prana Pena.
 et al. 2012. Kajian koleksi darpana perunggu 
& prasasti Jurungan. Yogyakarta: Pemerintah 
Daerah Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta.
Soekmono. 1988. Pengantar sejarah kebudayaan 
Indonesia 2 . Yogyakarta: Kanisius. 
. 1995. The Javanese Candi: Function and 
Meaning . Leiden/New York/Köln: E.J. Brill.
Wisseman Christie, Jan. 2000. Register of the 
Inscription of Java from 732 to 1060 A.D. Part 
I: 732 to 898 A.D. Consultation Draft.
07_CreSouthV2_5P_24Jun22.indd   144 24/6/22   4:01 PM

--- [Page 153] ---
Chapter 8
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at  
Candi Prambanan1
1.  
introduction
The central figure in this chapter is Sītā as 
depicted in the Rāmāyaṇa bas-reliefs on the 
inner side of the balustrade wall enclosing 
the ambulatories of the three main shrines of the 
temple complex of Candi Prambanan. One of the 
riddles that Sītā presents us with at this temple site 
is her background, that is to say her birth and par-
entage. This matter appears to be particularly rele-
vant for the interpretation of the twelfth bas-relief 
scene on the Brahmā temple, which shows Rāvaṇa’s 
corpse surrounded by a few women. The caption 
with the photograph taken by H. Leydie Melville 
around 1900 reads ‘Lamentation of Rawana by his 
wife Mandodari’ (see Fig. 8.1). This caption as well 
as the subsequent descriptions of the scene seems 
to me to fall short. For instance, unlike what some 
researchers write about the relief, it is not so much 
the death or the killing of Rāvaṇa that is represented 
here (presumably because of the alleged ill effects thereof) as his corpse lying in state on what looks 
like a funeral pyre. 
Next is the problem of the identification of the 
attending women. Contrary to what is commonly 
assumed, it may not only concern Queen Man -
dodarī and Rāvaṇa’s other queen-consorts. Because 
of the connection with the immediately preceding 
relief, which shows Sītā in the presence of Queen 
Mandodarī, it does not seem unlikely that Sītā had 
joined these mourning women. But if this suppo-
sition holds true, how should Sītā’s presence near 
the body of her abductor and constant tormentor 
be explained? In what personal relationship, if any, 
are they represented in this relief?
Perusal of the literature shows that in numer-
ous post-Vālmīki tellings, Sītā is represented as 
the daughter of Rāvaṇa with his main consort 
Mandodarī. This representation is known among 
widely separated peoples in countries like Tibet 
and Khotan (Turkmenistan), but also in Myanmar, 
Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Malaysia, and 
Indonesia (Java, Sunda).2 Also in India, where the 
Rāma-story originated, this idea is not completely 
unknown. Indeed, some scholars believe that the 
original idea was invented by the Jains. Initially it 
2. See John Brockington’s seminal work on the dissem -
ination and evolution of the Rāma saga, Righteous Rāma 
(Brockington 1985: 260–306). Lately, the search for relevant 
publications has been further facilitated by the open access 
to the exhaustive digital inventory by John and Mary Brock -
ington of the literature about the Rāma story as well as of 
the numerous distinct narrative motifs therein. The digital 
archive regarding the development and spread of the Rāma 
narrative (pre-modern) is accessible through ORA, Oxford 
University Research Archive (https://ora.ox.ac.uk). 1. This chapter is dedicated to Willem van der Molen in 
gratitude for his friendship and support to my Java-related 
investigations. Thanks to John and Mary Brockington for 
their incisive comments on earlier drafts, and to Robert 
Wessing for the final editing. Obviously, I alone am to 
blame for any remaining shortcomings.
 [Editors’ note: this draft chapter was submitted to 
the editors by the author just a week before his untimely 
death. Only minor changes to form, style, and figures’ 
numbering have been made. Additional comments by the 
editors are inserted hereafter within square brackets and 
marked as ‘Eds. ’]Roy E. Jordaan
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   145 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 154] ---
Roy E. Jordaan146
was assumed that the Uttarapurāṇa  of Guṇabhadra, 
a Jain text dated to the 8th or 9th century CE, was 
the origin of all narratives in which Sītā figures 
as Rāvaṇa’s daughter. Specialists in the field now 
believe, however, that Guṇabhadra may have taken 
the account of Sītā’s birth from the Vāsudevahiṇḍi 
by Saṅghadāsa, another Jain poet, whose work is 
dated to the end of the 6th century CE.3 
But why, given the age and wide distribution of 
the motif, has this identification of Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s 
daughter in the bas-reliefs of the Prambanan temple 
complex never been studied before? This oversight 
is all the more remarkable given that Sītā’s position 
as Rāvaṇa’s daughter in the Indo-Malay literature 
was known to scholars as early as the mid-19th 
3. See Bulcke (1952: 112) for the claim about Guṇabhadra’s 
text being the source of all later tales about Sītā’s kinship to 
Rāvaṇa. For more about other Jain tellings of the Rāmāyaṇa  
and the Vāsudevahiṇḍi, see Kulkarni (1959: 296) and De 
Clercq (2011). As pointed out by De Clercq, not all the Jain 
versions present Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s daughter.century.4 Although in his doctoral thesis W.F. 
Stutterheim paid some attention to the subject in 
extant Malay and Javanese Rāma-legends, he did 
not do so in relation to the Rāma-reliefs of the 
Hindu-Javanese temples of Prambanan and Pana-
taran, which were the twin foci of his art-historical 
research.5 As far as Prambanan is concerned this 
topic has, to the best of my knowledge, only once 
been mentioned in passing in connection with the 
eleventh relief of the Brahmā temple (see Fig. 8.8).6 
4. See, for instance, Dozon (1846) and Gerth van Wijk 
(1891). More recently, Noorduyn (1971) devoted a brief 
discussion to the topic in connection with his discovery of 
fragments of the Rāmāyaṇa in an Old Sundanese text. 
5. See Stutterheim 1989: 74–75, 85–87. Originally published 
in German in 1925, the English translation of Stutterheim’s 
path-breaking work was published in New Delhi in 1989. 
My citations and page references are to the English edition.
6. See Saran and Khanna (2004: 67), who, as we will see 
later, assume this relief to depict the very first meeting 
between Sītā and Queen Mandodarī, and of Mandodarī 
recognizing Sītā as her daughter by the milk that starts to 
flow from her breasts, as related in the Malay literary version 
Fig. 8.1: The wake for Rāvaṇa. (Photograph OD 2319)
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   146 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 155] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan147
This raises the question of whether other clues in 
some of the preceding reliefs also went unnoticed 
or were simply ignored. After all, it would not be 
the first time to see the ‘privileging’ of Vālmīki’s 
Rāmāyaṇa (hereafter VR) over other recensions 
in the interpretation of the Rāma-reliefs at Candi 
Prambanan—sometimes at the expense of more 
satisfactory descriptions of the reliefs that were 
the subject of study.
Looking back at the preceding narrative reliefs 
for Sītā’s presence, the first time she is depicted 
is on the Śiva temple, in the relief that is com -
monly designated as her syavaṃvara, the archery 
contest that would decide who was to be her future 
husband. Stutterheim thought he recognized Sītā’s 
father, Janaka, among the attending royals, but this 
identification, as we will see later, seems somewhat 
prejudiced and also premature as far as his parent -
hood is concerned—biological or adoptive. This 
aside, it cannot be deduced from the svayaṃvara  
relief what Sītā has to do with Rāvaṇa. The ques-
tion of Sītā’s birth and descent therefore remains 
unresolved.7 Was this a matter so well-known 
that it did not need separate depiction? Or are 
there pertinent clues in relevant reliefs that have 
thus far been overlooked or whose meanings were 
not sufficiently understood? As the clues in the 
Rāmāyaṇa-reliefs about Sītā’s descent cannot be 
separated from those of Rāma, I will start with the 
descent of the latter.
rāma’s descent and lineage  
at prambanan
Rāma’s descent is not clearly indicated either, but 
the first two Rāmāyaṇa-reliefs of the Śiva temple 
(Figs. 8.1, 8.2a) offer enough clues as to his par -
entage, even though the gradual clarification of 
of the Rāma-story. This supposition did not, however, lead 
to a deeper investigation of this kinship relation and a con-
sideration of the possible implications for the interpretation 
of other Prambanan reliefs.
7. A summary of the main literary versions of Sītā’s birth 
and parentage is beyond the scope of this article. Those 
interested in this topic are referred to the studies by Bulcke 
(1952), John Brockington (2007), Singaravelu (1982; 2004: 
203–219), and De Clercq (2011).each relief required the efforts of several dedicated 
researchers. The first relief shows the god Viṣṇu 
sitting in half-reclining position on the world 
snake Śeṣa, floating on the Cosmic Ocean in which 
various fish and other small sea creatures can be 
seen. To Viṣṇu’s right is his mount Garuḍa, and 
to his left a delegation of five figures requesting 
the god’s help against Rāvaṇa’s misdeeds. From 
the boon-granting gesture of his left hand it can 
be deduced that Viṣṇu promises his support. For 
this purpose he will incarnate in the human being 
Rāma and fight against Rāvaṇa.
Opinions are divided regarding the interpre -
tation of the second relief (Fig. 8.2a). Considering 
its importance for my own argument, a detailed 
review of the current interpretations of this relief 
is warranted. Such review is also called for because 
none of these interpretations mentions the re-in-
stalment of the long-lost final panel, which depicts 
a hard to identify human figure with a monkey on 
his shoulder (see Figs. 8.2a, 8.2b).
Whereas I. Groneman thought of a cosy royal 
family gathering, P.V. van Stein Callenfels more 
specifically suggested that King Daśaratha was dis -
cussing the future marriage of his son with one 
of his queen-consorts. The hypothetical marriage 
candidate he assumed to be the woman seated in 
the background. In the opinion of Stutterheim 
and J. Kats, however, this woman might also be 
Daśaratha’s daughter.8 Both researchers believed 
that the relief represents the announcement of the 
visit to the royal family by the sage Viśvāmitra, even 
though the sage himself is not depicted. Viśvāmi-
tra’s request for an audience is to request the King 
to put his sons at his disposal in order to stop the 
harassment by demons.
A completely different interpretation of the 
relief is put forward by Cecelia Levin, inspired 
by V. Raghavan’s remarks about the presence of 
the bird in the relief’s lower right-hand corner.9 
Raghavan associated this bird with the crow that 
steals one of the magical rice-cakes, which were 
meant to cause Daśaratha’s wives to bear him sons. 
Levin suggests that the scene as a whole represents 
this son-producing sacrifice, known as putreṣṭi-ya -
8. Stutterheim 1989: 118; Kats [1925]: n.p. 
9. Levin 1999: 171–172; Raghavan 1975: 100.
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   147 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 156] ---
Roy E. Jordaan148
Fig. 8.2a: Daśaratha’s family gathering consequent upon the putreṣṭi-yajña. (Photo OD 3468, reproduced from Kats 
[1925]: Plate II)
Fig. 8.2b: The right-hand relief-panel re-installed: showing a sitting bearded figure with a monkey on his shoulder. 
(Photo courtesy Jeffrey Sundberg)
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   148 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 157] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan149
jña or putrīyā iṣṭi, which she sought to connect 
with the first ritual in the Bālakāṇḍa (sargas 11–13) 
that had the form of a horse sacrifice (a śvamedha). 
Furthermore, she thought that the preparations 
for the ritual were hinted at in the Old Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa kakavin (hereafter OJR).10 In the ac -
companying note Levin refers to a representation 
of a horse sacrifice on an Indian temple as a means 
for Daśaratha’s putreṣṭi.11 The absence of pertinent 
indications of a horse sacrifice in the Rāma-relief of 
Prambanan did not deter her from interpreting the 
relief in terms of this sacrificial ritual, arguing that 
‘[r]ituals may have varied from region to region in 
India and this detail may not have been one known 
by the Javanese. Moreover, the description of the 
putreṣṭi ceremony in the OJR makes no reference to 
a horse’s head, but focuses instead on a description 
of a series of offerings, ablutions over a statue, and 
prayers to the god of fire.’12
Saran and Khanna dismiss Levin’s interpreta-
tion, arguing that: ‘The conduct of an important 
sacrifice is hard to divine here as we find no evi-
dence either of the sacred fire or the accoutrements 
of ritual that are unmistakably portrayed on other 
such occasions.’13 This looks like a debate at cross 
purposes. What the Indian scholars have in mind 
with sacred fire in relation to the present Rāma-re -
lief is the second ritual described in the Bālakāṇḍa 
(sargas 14–15) which is also connected with the 
putrīyā iṣṭi. This second ritual consists of a fire sac -
10. As is known, the OJR is not directly based on VR 
but on the 7th-century Rāvaṇavadha, better known as the 
Bhaṭṭikāvya, a recreation of Vālmīki’s text by the poet Bhaṭṭi 
who had particular literary-educational purposes in mind 
with his work. [Eds.: for a recent edition and translation 
of the OJR, see Kern and van der Molen 2015 and Robson 
2015.]
11. According to John Brockington, who was so kind to 
check Levin’s references, the figure with the ‘horse-head’ on 
the Indian temple in question may well have been confused 
with Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, legendary son of an ascetic father and deer 
mother, who is commonly and appropriately shown with 
a deer’s head. Considering further that the Indian repre-
sentation is part of the putreṣṭi (not the aśvamedha), Levin 
appears to have conflated the two rituals (John Brockington, 
personal communication).
12. Levin 1999: 226, n. 1. [Eds.: For a translation of this 
passage of the OJR (1.21–31), see Robson 2015: 36–38.] 
13. Saran and Khanna 2004: 85, n. 14. rifice in which a mysterious figure emerges from 
the flames, holding a bowl of pāyasa, a sweet of 
milk and rice, that is parcelled out among Daśar-
atha’s wives as a fructifying porridge.14 Because 
of the absence of evidence of such a fire sacrifice 
in the relief in question, Saran and Khanna prefer 
Stutterheim’s and Kats’ interpretation of the an-
nouncement of Viśvāmitra’s visit to Daśaratha’s 
court.
A weak point in this interpretation, however, 
is not only the absence of Viśvāmitra in this relief, 
but also that it largely coincides with the next relief, 
representing the sage’s visit itself, and therefore 
seems superfluous. Considering the limited space 
available to the sculptors for depicting the Rā -
ma-story at Candi Prambanan, the use of a large 
separate relief scene comprising three panels solely 
for the purpose of the anticipated visit would, in 
my opinion, have taken up too much precious 
space. But there are also substantial objections to 
be raised against Saran and Khanna’s reasoning. 
For one thing it seems unwarranted to extrapolate 
the absence of indications for the fire sacrifice to 
the claim that no ritual items are shown in the 
relief at all. Stutterheim’s early description shows 
that more is to be seen in the relief than Saran and 
Khanna want us to believe, such as the objects on 
the decorated tray on the ground in the middle 
of the relief that Stutterheim tentatively linked 
to a flower offering in connection with Viśvāmi-
tra’s visit.15 It seems a valid question therefore 
whether another interpretation is conceivable for 
this flower offering.
This also holds for the interpretation of what 
is visible in the right-hand section of the relief: a 
squatting figure, presumably a gatekeeper, in the 
opening of a door of an inner gate, who looks 
in the direction of the above-mentioned bird. 
Stutterheim’s description—‘in the foreground is 
a big bird with a long beak [that] is drinking (?) 
from a vessel, in which there are some plants’—is 
14. Among the Rāma-reliefs of the Amṛteśvara temple at 
Amṛtapura, a Hoysaḷa temple from the 12th century, is a 
relief that represents the putriyā iṣṭi in which this mysterious 
figure is actually depicted as standing in the fire and offering 
a bowl to the keeper, who instructs the king to distribute 
the pāyasa among his queens (see Evans 1997: 42, Fig. 8).
15. Stutterheim 1989: 116.
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   149 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 158] ---
Roy E. Jordaan150
open to improvement. A closer look reveals that 
rather than a vase it concerns a small square chest 
or a basket.16 Moreover, the bird is not drinking, 
but seems to be rooting in the basket with its 
beak—presumably in search for something edible; 
something that can also be deduced from the in-
terest shown in the basket’s contents by a tame 
mongoose. What Sutterheim took for plants could 
be the beak and the wing of yet another bird, but 
because of the damage to this part of the relief 
this cannot be determined with certainty on the 
basis of extant photographs of the former Dutch 
Indies Archaeological Service. 
Next is the question of the identification of 
the male figure with curly hair seated to the right 
of the basket. Dwelling on conjectural remarks 
about the import of ‘Negro’ slaves in ancient Java, 
Stutterheim deemed it possible that it depicted 
a ‘Negro’ slave, or a tribesman from the Indian 
interior who supposedly could also have Negroid 
traits. But he admitted that he could not explain 
the figure’s presence in the relief.
On the basis of the re-installed relief section that 
had long been thought lost, it now turns out that it 
does not concern one sitting male figure, but two. 
Thanks to the panel’s being less weathered, the curly 
hair of this second figure is clearer than that of his 
companion, as are his beard and arm bracelet. On 
his shoulder sits a monkey that seems to be scratch -
ing himself. All this supplementary iconographic 
information, however, does not help to resolve the 
question of the identity of the two male figures. 
Speculatively one could venture the suggestion of 
an artist duo considering the tame mongoose and 
the monkey in their company. Whether or not the 
two men in question also have something to do 
with the bird is impossible to say for want of any 
surviving tales about the presence of an artist duo 
during the putreṣṭi ceremony.
The reason that Levin’s interpretation of the 
relief is not satisfactory is that she tries to connect 
the putreṣṭi-yajña with the aśvamedha,  the first 
16. [Eds.: the word in the original publication by Stut -
terheim, rendered by the author as ‘vessel’ and ‘vase’, is 
Behälter, i.e. a ‘container, case, receptacle, box’ for the 
storage of both liquid and non-liquid substances.]ritual mentioned in the Bālakāṇḍa, rather than 
following Raghavan’s original idea which was 
phrased as follows: ‘it strikes me that the correct 
identification of [the scene] is that it is the 
performance of sacrifices for the birth of sons to 
Daśaratha and a crow carrying part of the cakes 
intended for Daśaratha’s Queens to Lanka, as 
found in some other S.E. Asian versions.’17
Although Levin did connect Raghavan’s crow 
with the bird Gāgak Svāra figuring in the hikayats, 
meaning the 13th to 17th-century Malay literary 
versions of the Rāma-story, she did not consider 
the information about the theft of the rice-cakes. 
The Roorda van Eysinga edition of the Hikayat Sә ri 
Rama [hereafter HSR] connects the mischievous 
behaviour of the crow with Rāvaṇa, the demon 
ruler and Rāma’s future opponent.18 It concerns 
the passage about Rāma’s birth and descent that 
has been usefully summarized by Zieseniss:
Since King Daśaratha has no sons he calls in the 
help of the priest Mahārisī, who orders him to 
prepare a sacrificial ceremony. A few days later, 
the priest arrives in a flying chariot to conduct the ceremony. This happening is witnessed by 
Gāgak Svāra, Rāvaṇa’s grandfather in the form 
of a crow, who decides to use the ceremony 
for the benefit of Rāvaṇa by stealing one of the 
three rice-balls that were meant for Daśara-tha’s chief queen. The priest curses him for the 
mischievous act and predicts that Rāvaṇa will 
die at the hands of Daśaratha’s son and that 
the child born from the stolen rice-ball will 
become the wife of the latter. After some time 
Daśaratha’s sons are born: Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa 
17. Raghavan 1975: 100–101. 
18. It should be noted that the Shellabear edition of the 
HSR, which is dated to the 17th century, follows a dif -
ferent tradition in which Daśaratha receives four bezoar 
stones from a maharṣi as means to enhance the fertility 
of his two wives. Since the rice-balls and the theft of one 
of these by a crow are missing from this edition, my dis-
cussion will focus on the story-line of the Roorda van 
Eysinga manuscript. Although copied at a later moment 
than the Shellabear manuscript, the Roorda recension is 
much older and can be traced back to the 13th century. 
For more information on the different recensions of the 
HSR, see Zieseniss (1963: 179–180), Barrett (1963), Brakel 
(1980), and Achadiati Ikram (1980).
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   150 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 159] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan151
with his chief queen, and the sons Bharata and 
Śatrughna, and a daughter Kīkevī Devī, with his 
younger wife.19
In connection with the rice-balls, the crow-like 
bird standing on the basket with the food should, 
I think, be interpreted as an iconological clue, 
derived from the Rāma-story that was followed 
by the Prambanan sculptors.20 This text was neither 
VR nor the OJR, as the intrusion by the crow during 
the putreṣṭi is missing there, while six rice-balls 
or rice-cakes in a box or basket is obviously not 
the same thing as rice-porridge served in a bowl. 
Besides, in VR and the OJR King Daśaratha has 
three queen-consorts, while at Prambanan, as I will 
argue shortly, only two wives are depicted, which is 
in consonance with the tradition preserved in the 
HSR. In Vālmīki’s telling, each of the three queens 
receive a different amount of the pāyasa while in 
the HSR the two queens (whose divergent names 
and fates will be discussed later) receive an equal 
amount, that is three rice-balls each. The theft of 
part of the pāyasa by a crow is not mentioned in 
VR or in the OJR. 
The interpretation of the bird’s behaviour sheds 
a new light on the relief as a whole. In my opinion, 
the scene is synoptic in the sense that temporal -
ly separated but mutually related events in the 
original story are collated in the relief as if they 
happened simultaneously. Obviously, this set-up 
only succeeds if the designers could assume that 
the audience or rather viewers were sufficiently 
familiar with the version of the story that they 
had to visualize.21 ‘Implied narrative’ is one of 
the means used in this endeavour, which Levin 
has described as the selection of particular infor-
19. Zieseniss 1963: 13–14, abbreviations expanded; compare 
Barrett 1963: 541–542. Note that in this telling Mandodarī 
(not Kausalyā) is Daśaratha’s chief wife and not Rāvaṇa’s, 
something I will return to later. Baliadari, Daśaratha’s 
second wife in the HSR, should be identified with Kaikeyī, 
his junior queen in VR. Daśaratha’s third wife, Sumitrā, 
does not figure in the Malay telling.
20. Notice worthy is that the base of the food basket is 
decorated with six round balls, thus matching the number 
of rice-balls of the HSR.
21. For this assumption, see Levin (1999: 157) and Mary 
Brockington (2012: 204).mation to imply an incident or dialogue.22 In the 
relief in question the presence of the bird is used 
to refer to the performance of the putreṣṭi-yajña  
and simultaneously to show that the fertility ritual 
had been effective and that the two wives of King 
Daśaratha had borne him four sons. Moreover, 
the sons are represented as adults. They can be 
seen sitting together on the ground against the 
background of a heavily damaged horse. Rāma 
is recognizable by his high crown (mukuṭa), his 
brothers by their decorated headbands, each with 
his hair tied into a bun underneath.
Behind the horse is an elephant. On account of 
the bell on the animal’s neck and the decorations 
on its forehead and body, Stutterheim thought 
that it was a royal elephant. Immediately to the 
left is a female figure whose identity is unclear. 
Stutterheim and Kats believed her to be a daughter 
of King Daśaratha, but this seems unlikely to me 
considering her more elevated seating position 
in relation to Daśaratha’s sons.23 That she must 
be a woman of royal standing is evident from her 
jewellery and caste cord. In view of the absence of 
a crown and the distance from the king, I believe 
her to be Kaikeyī, his junior queen, while the other 
crowned female figure, sitting closer to the King, 
should be identified as Kausalyā, his chief wife. 
Although the unidentified female figure is so 
heavily damaged that a direct identification is im-
possible, I do think there is more to say in favour of 
identifying her as Kaikeyī than as Kīkevī Devī. First, 
because of the hierarchical-generational distinction 
that separates her from Daśaratha’s sons (includ-
ing her own children Bharata and Śatrughna) and 
second because of her placement near the elephant. 
This last cannot be coincidental because in the HSR  
it is said of Baliadara (who should be identified with 
Kaikeyī in VR) that she saved the life of the king 
when during a tour around the city he would have 
22. See Levin 1999: 136–141.
23. Here I take the opportunity to renounce my earlier 
reliance on Stutterheim and Kats in identifying the woman 
in question as Daśaratha’s daughter. Consequently, my own 
association of the female royal figure in the sixteenth relief 
of the Brahmā temple with this daughter can no longer be 
maintained (see Jordaan 2011: 195–196). Rather it is Kaikeyī 
who is persuading King Daśaratha to appoint Bharata as 
the successor to his throne.
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   151 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 160] ---
Roy E. Jordaan152
fallen from his elephant had she not supported his 
palanquin, breaking her arm in the process. The 
identification proposed here implies that Kaikeyī’s 
daughter, Kīkevī Devī (who should also have been 
seated in a lower position), is not represented in 
the relief.
If my identification of the second royal female 
figure as Kaikeyī is correct, it is not only Kīkevī 
Devī who is absent but also Sumitrā, the king’s 
third queen-consort. This inference, as we will see 
below, has repercussions for the current interpre-
tation of the next relief, which shows Viśvāmitra’s 
visit to Daśaratha’s court to solicit Rāma’s help 
against the rākṣasa who are wreaking havoc in his 
hermitage (see Fig. 8.3).
viśvāmitra ’s visit to daśaratha ’s 
court
According to van Stein Callenfels the figure seated 
in elevated position in the middle of the relief 
should be identified as Viśvāmitra, while King 
Daśaratha and his three queen-consorts sit respect -
fully to his right. In Stutterheim’s more detailed 
analysis the two figures with the ‘spiral crowns’ 
on Daśaratha’s right are identified as Kaikeyī and 
Sumitrā, while the other woman with the ‘usual 
[royal] head-dress’ on his left is Kausalyā. Seated on the ground on Viśvāmitra’s left are some of 
the sage’s disciples. In the background two curly-
haired servants try to rein in two prancing horses. 
Considering that Stutterheim’s analysis has never 
been questioned, we may assume that it now rep-
resents the communis opinio among art historians. 
I beg to differ, however.
Before proceeding, let us bear in mind that Stut -
terheim himself was aware that the representation 
is not in consonance with VR, in which Daśaratha 
is accompanied by his family priest rather than 
by his wives. As it is clear that VR is not followed 
here, the question arises why Daśaratha should all 
of a sudden be accompanied by his three wives. 
In the previous relief Stutterheim had identified 
only one wife, the chief queen Kausalyā. The iden -
tification of the second female figure as Kaikeyī 
is my own proposal, based on the information 
preserved in the HSR. Contrary to van Stein Cal-
lenfels and Stutterheim, I think that the same two 
wives accompany Daśaratha during Viśvāmitra’s 
court visit. It is far from obvious that the figure 
in the middle (immediately to Daśaratha’s right) 
represents Sumitrā, if indeed the figure is that of 
a woman. Stutterheim makes light of this gender 
identification by reminding us of what he had 
pejoratively dubbed Groneman’s ‘breast theory’, 
but comparison of the middle figure’s breasts with 
Fig. 8.3: Viśvāmitra’s court visit. (Photo OD 3469,  reproduced from Kats [1925]: Plate III)
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   152 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 161] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan153
those of Viśvāmitra’s disciples leaves ample room 
for doubt.24 Couldn’t the figure be Rāma? 
Honesty compels me to say that my alternative 
identification as Rāma cannot be demonstrated 
directly, because not only the breasts but also the 
crowns and the royal figures’ jewellery hardly differ 
from each other.25 Yet if we leave out the breasts, 
crowns and jewellery from further consideration 
for their liability to subjective appraisals, there are 
two arguments in favour of identifying the figure 
in the middle as Rāma. 
24. In the first Rāma-relief (Fig. 8.1) Groneman had 
Daśaratha’s family identified with the group of five persons 
who sought Viṣṇu’s help against Rāvaṇa, an identifica -
tion based mainly on the slightly pronounced breasts of 
some of these persons that he attributed to the infertility of 
Daśaratha’s wives. Stutterheim’s amended identification of 
these persons as male ascetics may be true of the first relief, 
but ironically leaves open the possibility that in the second 
relief (Fig. 8.2a) exactly the same thing is the case, and that 
the alleged queen Sumitrā is in fact Prince Rāma. Aside 
from the comparison with the breasts of the male disciples 
of Viśvāmitra, I would like to point to Rāma’s pronounced 
breasts in the third relief (Fig. 8.2b) which depicts him 
killing the rākṣasī Tāṭakā. The overall resemblance of the 
two Rāmas is so striking that the execution may well have 
been the work of the same artisan.
25. The seeming arbitrariness in the display of crowns 
and halos of the main figures in the Rāma-story has been 
repeatedly observed by previous researchers, among whom 
Vogel (1921: 214, n. 1), Stutterheim (1989: 117, 231, n. 518), and 
Levin (1999: 130).The first argument concerns the number of 
Daśaratha’s wives at Candi Prambanan. Here I 
would like to call attention to the eleventh relief 
on the Śiva temple, which depicts the distressed 
atmosphere prevailing at Daśaratha’s court when 
Rāma, Sītā, and Lakṣmaṇa go into exile (see Fig. 
8.4, centre). We can see the king and his wife 
Kausalyā sitting on an elevated platform, stooped 
and with their faces turned downwards, literally 
beaten down by sorrow. What has thus far escaped 
attention is the other woman on the same platform, 
sitting upright and looking back at the previous 
scene with an intent expression. In my opinion, 
sitting on the same platform as the king and queen, 
this can only be Kaikeyī, and not a servant. The 
figure’s body language strengthens this identifi -
cation, for rather than being despondent Kaikeyī 
had every reason to rejoice at Rāma’s departure 
as this was part of her plan to have her own son 
Bharata mount the throne.26 A third wife, Sumitrā, 
26. Considering that Kaikeyī is looking intently in the di-
rection of what is generally taken for the festivities attending 
the consecration of a prince as yuvarāja (prince regent), I 
concur with Stutterheim’s suggestion that it concerns the 
consecration of her son Bharata, and not Rāma as was later 
proposed by Saran and Khanna (2004: 43). A look at the 
balustrade wall shows that the scenes in question are joined 
and should not therefore be interpreted in isolation but 
as coherent parts in which Bharata’s consecration (who 
is seconded by his brother Śatrughna) is logically linked Fig. 8.4: Bharata’s consecration (left) and Rāma’s departure for exile (right) Seated on the platform in the middle 
are Kaikeyī, Kausalyā and Daśaratha, whose postures indicate the differential impact of the two related events. 
(Photo courtesy Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam)
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   153 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 162] ---
Roy E. Jordaan154
is nowhere to be seen, which supports my claim 
that Daśaratha at Prambanan only has two wives: 
Kausalyā and Kaikeyī.
The second argument concerns Rāma’s pres -
ence during Viśvāmitra’s court visit, which, as said, 
was to solicit Daśaratha’s sons help against the 
demons. Considering that in the previous relief 
Rāma is represented as an adult man (contrary to 
VR, where he is still a boy wearing side-locks, as 
befits his status), I find it improbable that as the 
mature person directly involved he would not have 
been present during the deliberations. 
What remains to be discussed in the second 
relief are the two horses in the background. I take 
their prancing and the efforts of the grooms to rein 
them in as an indication of Viśvāmitra’s recent 
arrival at Daśaratha’s court. Considering that his 
conveyance was a flying chariot drawn by divine 
horses, the Javanese artisans may have opted for 
the image of frenzied horses to give an approx -
imate indication of the swiftness of Daśaratha’s 
arrival. Levin, on the other hand, connects the 
two horses with the imminent departure of Rāma 
and Lakṣmaṇa, but fails to notice the incongruity 
of Lakṣmaṇa’s absence in the present relief. The 
latter only appears in the next relief, but there we 
see him and Rāma setting out on foot.
sītā’s birth and descent
On the basis of the first two reliefs on the Śiva 
temple we have come to see Rāma as an incarna-
tion of the god Viṣṇu, an insight that facilitates 
our understanding of Rāma’s heroic deeds in the 
subsequent narrative reliefs at Prambanan. Not so 
with Sītā. Without information about her birth and 
descent, the current interpretations of the reliefs 
in which she figures have come to reveal so many 
problematic aspects that it seems worth delving 
deeper into the meaning of the iconological clues 
of the crow and the rice-balls during the putreṣṭi 
ceremony. The primary aim of this investigation is 
to find a plausible explanation for Sītā’s presence at 
Rāvaṇa’s funeral gathering. In fact, the re-interpre -
tation of the relevant reliefs following Daśaratha’s 
both with Kaikeyī’s, Kausalyā’s, and Daśaratha’s different 
postures and with Rāma’s departure from court (see Fig. 8.4). putreṣṭi amounts to a test of the hypothesis that 
Sītā is Rāvaṇa’s daughter in the visual Rāmāyaṇa 
of Candi Prambanan.
It may be recalled that Gāgak Svāra, the demon 
in the form of a crow, stole one of the six rice-balls 
for the benefit of Rāvaṇa, his grandchild. His in -
tention, however, was thwarted by the officiating 
priest’s curse to the effect that the person who ate 
from the stolen rice-ball would die at the hands of 
the spouse of the future child. The story then con-
tinues as follows: after receiving the rice-ball from 
Gāgak Svāra, Rāvaṇa eats the ball himself instead of 
giving it to his wife (as did Daśaratha). Sītā is born 
as the daughter of Rāvaṇa. Seen from a structuralist 
perspective this is an inversion: because the rice-
balls should have been eaten by a woman in order 
to produce sons, the consumption of the rice-ball 
by Rāvaṇa for ‘mytho-logical’ reasons had to result 
in the opposite, namely the birth of a daughter.
This information in the Roorda van Eysinga 
edition of the HSR would have sufficed to explain 
Sītā’s birth if the person who first wrote down the 
tale in Malay-Arabic script had not interrupted 
the flow of the original birth-story by inserting a 
new section. He presumably thought this necessary 
in order to bring the story in harmony with the 
doctrines of Islam, which were increasingly fore -
grounded in Indo-Malay society from the 13th to 
the 17th century.27 In summary, the text fragment 
runs as follows:
After Daśaratha’s chief wife, here called Man-
dodarī, gives birth to Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, 
27. See also, for instance, Stutterheim 1989: 71; Barrett 1963; 
Hussein 1980: 144; Achadiati Ikram 1980: 84. I think that 
Amin Sweeney (1987: 26) exaggerates when he calls the HSR  
in its extant form a Muslim work. The Roorda van Eysinga 
manuscript clearly represents a treatise that was still in the 
process of becoming one. The unfinished character of the 
makeover is not only reflected in deliberate excisions and 
forced adjustments of offensive Hindu-Buddhist notions 
(such as polytheism and ideas about transmigration, in -
carnation, and salvation), but also helps to explain the 
occasional interjection by the author of cautionary notes 
like ‘Allah knows best whether this narration is true.’ This 
very interjection is used in the discussion of the causeway 
episode (see Jordaan 2011: 202) and appears to be quite 
specific and should, therefore, not be confused with the 
more common pious Islamic expressions and stock phrases 
such as ‘only Allah is perfect and all-knowing’.
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   154 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 163] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan155
rumors reach Rāvaṇa about her extraordinary 
beauty. He decides to pay Daśaratha a visit and 
claim Mandodarī for his own on account of 
his position as overlord. Daśaratha cannot but 
comply with this demand. Mandodarī, howev-
er, persuades her husband to request a few days 
of respite from Rāvaṇa. In the meantime, and 
without their knowledge, Mandodarī creates 
a replica of herself, who is named Mandudaki. 
Rāvaṇa takes this double back to Lanka. When 
Daśaratha discovers his wife’s trick he decides 
to follow Rāvaṇa in disguise. In Lanka he se-
cretly gains access to Rāvaṇa’s female quarters 
and is the first to have sexual intercourse with 
Mandudaki, the pseudo-Mandodarī. Sometime 
after her marriage to Rāvaṇa, Mandudaki gives 
birth to a daughter who we will later come to 
know as Sītā.28
Three arguments can be advanced for regarding 
this text fragment as an interpolation. First, the 
observation made by Bulcke and others that 
nowhere in the Indian Rāma tales is Mandodarī 
ever represented as Daśaratha’s wife, nor did he 
ever get her from Rāvaṇa.29 As for the reason of 
this adaptation, Barrett has noted that ‘The incident 
occurs nowhere outside the HSR and the [Javanese] 
Serat Kanda, and has evidently been inserted by 
someone who does not want the heroine to be 
born to the villain!’30 Barrett goes further in this 
than Bulcke, who did not so much think of the 
pseudo-Mandodarī’s fecundation as her deflora -
tion lest Rāvaṇa find out that she no longer was 
a virgin, which is in fact the reason given in the 
Serat Kanda text.31
The second argument is based on Achadiati 
Ikram’s finding that in the manuscripts of the HSR 
that she researched the text fragment in question is 
both confused and confusing, and does not seem to 
have a clear function within the overall structure of 
the story. Thus it appears that the name Mandudaki 
is not used equivocally: whereas one version does 
not refer to Mandudaki at all and only vaguely 
28. Zieseniss 1963: 15–16.
29. Rather than an interpolation, Bulcke (1952: 117) refers 
to the text fragment as ‘cette histoire très bizarre’.
30. Barrett 1963: 542, n. 1.
31. See Stutterheim 1989: 59.to ‘a woman’, the other manuscripts not only do 
not use the name consistently but in the course 
of their telling they all come to speak of Sītā as 
Mandodarī’s child.32
The third and decisive reason to assume that 
the text fragment about Mandudaki was not found 
in the proto-HSR, and that Queen Mandodarī 
was simply Rāvaṇa’s wife, is the existence of yet 
another Southeast Asian version in which a crow 
steals one of Daśaratha’s rice-cakes. This is the 
Rāmakīen, a late-18th century Thai rendition of the 
Rāma-story.33 In spite of the evident adaptations of 
the personal names and various other adjustments 
and insertions, the original storyline can still be 
discerned.34 Abbreviated to the barest essentials, 
the Thai rendition goes as follows:
Kalaikot [=Ṛṣyaśṛṅga] takes the lead in organis-
ing the son-producing ceremony. Fires are kin-
dled under the cooking pots and the holy rice 
begins to cook. The food smells delicious and its 
odour drifts throughout the countryside, even 
as far as Laṅkā. Smelling the food, Nang Monto 
[=Mandodarī] becomes very hungry and tells 
Totsakan [=Rāvaṇa] that he must get her some 
of the food. He sent for the Queen of the crows, 
who flies off to Ayutaya [=Ayodhyā], stealing a 
piece of the holy rice that Nang Monto eats her-
self [not Rāvana, as in the HSR]. Nang Monto 
begets a daughter. Scarcely has she been born 
or the child cries three times ‘Death to the de-
mons’ Totsakan has the child’s horoscope cast, 
whereby it is learned that she would bring great 
misfortune on the demons. Totsakan has the 
child thrown into the river enclosed in a glass 
jar. Eventually the child is saved and adopted 
by Chanok [=Janaka], who gives her the name 
of Sang Sida [=Sītā].
The reason to break off this excerpt from the much 
younger and hybrid Thai telling at this point is 
that what follows (as in the HSR and Serat Kanda ) 
proves to be of little or no help for interpreting the 
sixth bas-relief on the Śiva temple that is known 
as Sītā’s svayaṃvara: the election of her marriage 
32. Achadiati Ikram 1980: 31–33.
33. For more on the compilation of the Rāmakīen, see 
Velder (1968: 35–37).
34. Olsson 1968: 65–69. 
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   155 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 164] ---
Roy E. Jordaan156
partner on the basis of an archery contest. The 
svayaṃvara, as said, is the first relief in which Sītā 
appears at Candi Prambanan and the first time she 
meets Rāma in person (see Fig. 8.5).
sītā’s svayaṃvara
Represented within the framework of this long 
relief is the introduction to and Rāma’s actual 
involvement in the archery contest. In the first two 
panels of the relief we see Viśvāmitra, Lakṣmaṇa, 
Rāma, and King Janaka seated together under 
the roof of an open pavilion. They are most likely 
discussing Rāma’s participation in the contest. 
Rāma can be identified with the person who has 
his arms across his breast, which Sutterheim 
took as a gesture of agreement that he would try  
his luck with the bow. Alternatively, it could 
represent Rāma preparing himself mentally for 
the challenge.
In the next section we see Rāma successful -
ly shooting an arrow into the air, assisted by 
Lakṣmaṇa who holds the tip of the bow. Looking 
on at Rāma’s achievement is Sītā who is accom-
panied by two women. Previous researchers were 
cognizant of the fact that the representation of 
the svayaṃvara differs from Vālmīki’s description 
in which the huge bow breaks apart when Rāma 
strings it. Another divergence is the presence of Sītā’s two female companions, who cannot be iden -
tified as maidservants in view of their crowns and 
clothing (as was already argued by Stutterheim 
against van Stein Callenfels). The identification as 
servants seems more apt for the bare-chested men 
sitting on the ground behind Viśvāmitra.
What interests us here in particular is the iden-
tification of the royal figure sitting behind and to 
the left of Rāma (right underneath the two pigeons 
on the roof) as King Janaka. In my opinion, Stut-
terheim stretches the truth when he writes that this 
figure’s crown is of a ‘totally different kind’ than the 
other crowns, both in the present relief and in the 
preceding and succeeding reliefs, and that the royal 
figure should therefore be identified as Janaka, the 
foreign king on account of this differently looking 
crown. This is the reason that I find Stutterheim’s 
identification plausible, be it somewhat circular 
and tendentious.
Of more importance, however, is that it cannot 
be deduced from Janaka’s presence whether he was 
Sītā’s adoptive father, as is taken for granted in the 
literature about this relief. The scene does not offer 
any obvious visual clues to Sītā’s parentage, except 
perhaps her two female companions. Stutterheim 
suggests that these might represent Sītā’s sisters, 
noting at the same time that the epic makes no 
mention of two sisters. To Stutterheim this was a 
trivial matter, saying that ‘such a deviation from 
Vālmīki’s epic need not worry us too much as there Fig. 8.5: Sītā’s svayaṃvara . (Reproduced from Kats [1925]: Plate VI)
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   156 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 165] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan157
are so many other deviations.’35 Regrettably, I have 
not succeeded in finding a Rāma-story in which 
two princesses act as Sītā’s companions during 
her svayaṃvara. As far as is known, Sītā has just 
one sister, Urmilā, who may or may not have been 
married to Lakṣmaṇa, but otherwise remains an 
enigmatic personage.
from kiṣkindhā to hanumān’s search 
for sītā in laṅkā
The next relevant relief section to be reviewed was 
until very recently seen as a stopgap scene of the 
34th relief on the Śiva temple that depicts the de-
liberations about the strategy to be followed in the 
search for Sītā, between Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa on 
the one hand, and Sugrīva and his monkey officers 
on the other (see Fig. 8.6).
Groneman thought that this final relief section 
shows Hanumān’s arrival in Laṅkā after his jump 
across the sea passage. He identified the two 
squatting young women in the foreground as Sītā 
and Trijaṭā, the other two standing figures in the 
background as rākṣasa women. Contrary to this, 
van Stein Callenfels, Stutterheim, and Kats con-
sidered the right-hand scene to only be a stopgap, 
depicting a comic incident in the monkey palace 
35. Stutterheim 1989: 121. at Kiṣkindhā. Stutterheim’s description refers to 
five women, whom he places into two distinct cat-
egories and describes as follows: ‘Three women 
are seated, one behind the other, with the hairdo 
becoming progressively less ornamented.’ While 
van Stein Callenfels assumed them to be monkey 
queens, Stutterheim tentatively identified them as 
‘Tārā, Vālin’s and now Sugrīva’s spouse, and two 
other women of lesser rank but they are not sup-
posed to have any relationship with Rāma.’36 These 
latter two women, he thought to be just servants: 
‘A curly-haired maidservant facing the other side. 
She makes a horrified gesture and is striking with 
a twig of leaves. Below a second maid-servant.’ 
Levin’s description is as follows: ‘Sugrīwa, 
surrounded by his armies and wives, apologiz -
es to Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa’, to which she adds: 
‘While Sugrīwa addresses Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa 
two female servants scold a monkey.’37 It is evident 
from her analysis that Levin situates the scene 
in the monkey kingdom of Kiṣkindhā, and that 
she takes the women to be monkeys, saying ‘one 
of Sugrīwa’s wives scolds a monkey, a biological 
relative of her husband, for defecating on the roof 
of a building.’38 
36. Ibid.: 140.
37. Levin 1999: 323.
38. Ibid. : 155.
Fig. 8.6: Strategic deliberations between Sugrīva and Rāma (left); Hanumān causing disturbance in Laṅkā (right). 
(Reproduced from Kats [1925]: Plate XXXIV)
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   157 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 166] ---
Roy E. Jordaan158
In my opinion, Saran and Khanna’s interpreta-
tion (in which Groneman’s and Stutterheim’s ideas 
are combined) cuts more ice and is a step forward 
in the iconographic analysis of the scene. They hold 
that the right-hand scene depicts the beginning of 
Hanumān’s search in Laṅkā:
Hanuman arrives in Lanka, in the garden 
where Sita is imprisoned. He seems to be steal-
ing two mangoes, defecates on the roof-top and 
is caught in this act by an irate rakshasa wom-
an who throws up her hands in disgust as she 
angrily shoos away the thief. Seeing the com-
motion another rakshasa woman points him 
out to Sita. Here we have the resulting effect of 
an action being portrayed before its cause. This 
episode is not mentioned in the Valmiki Ra-
mayana, but the Hikayat Seri Rama describes 
an incident in which Sita presents Hanuman 
with two delicious mangoes from Ravana’s gar-
den. However, in our relief Hanuman has not 
yet met Sita. Once again we have the Javanese 
sculptors recording some incident popular 
then, which was re-interpreted several centu-
ries later in the Hikayat Seri Rama.39
In spite of the progress their interpretation repre-
sents, Saran and Khanna’s description is open to 
further improvement. As I see it, the lower seated 
rākṣasī is doing the very opposite of pointing 
at Hanumān: the fingers of both her hands un -
mistakably point at Sītā. This can be taken as an 
attempt to direct Hanumān’s attention towards 
the searched-for princess. The act of this rākṣasī 
proves that the scene is set in Laṅkā, and not in the 
monkey’s palace in Kiṣkindhā as Levin and others 
assumed (except Groneman). Moreover, given that 
this rākṣasī looks younger and friendlier than the 
ugly twig-wielding female demon, I am inclined to 
identify her as Trijaṭā who sided with Sītā during 
her imprisonment. 
Oddly enough Saran and Khanna do not say 
anything about the woman wearing a crown who is 
seated right behind Sītā, or about the third woman, 
who, barely visible stands at the back with both 
arms raised in the air. This is presumably another 
irritated rākṣasī. But who is the second woman? Just 
like Sītā she wears a crown, earrings and a necklace, 
39. Saran and Khanna 2004: 56.which mark her as a royal person, either a princess 
or a queen. Her and Sītā’s response, dignified and  
self-effacing, suits their station—how otherwise 
should royals behave when confronted with a mis -
chievous monkey who is openly defecating on their 
rooftop? The unidentified lady has her right-hand 
on top of Sitā’s shoulder as if to reassure her. I 
venture to suggest that it is Mandodarī, Rāvaṇa’s 
chief queen. If this is correct, she enters the stage 
much earlier, that is to say on the Śiva temple 
rather than on the Brahmā temple, as Saran and 
Khanna suggest (who have, as said, the first and 
only meeting between Sītā and Mandodarī take 
place in the eleventh relief of the Brahmā temple). 
What can be upheld is their explanation for Man-
dodarī’s recognition of Sītā as her daughter, namely 
the milk that spontaneously oozes from her breasts 
as is told in the Hikayat.40 
hanumān’s meeting sītā  
in the aśoka-grove
Unlike the previous researchers, I believe that 
Queen Mandodarī is also represented in the relief 
that depicts Hanumān’s meeting with Sītā in the 
Aśoka-grove (see Fig. 8.7). To demonstrate the 
plausibility of this contention, I first have to point 
out the problems with the current interpretations, 
particularly those pertaining to the identity of the 
second crowned woman who stands next to Sītā in 
the first of the two relief-sections (Figs. 8.7a, 8.7b). 
Van Stein Callenfels writes of a servant drawing 
Sītā’s attention to Hanumān, hiding in a thicket, 
but does not mention the second crowned woman. 
The woman sitting next to Sītā in the right-hand 
section he identified as Kalā, whom he represents 
as Vibhīṣaṇa’s daughter. Stutterheim, on the other 
hand, refers to the two crowned women in the first 
part (Fig. 8.7a) as Sītā and Trijaṭā. He suggests 
that Trijaṭā is dressed as a royal lady because as 
40. Another earlier example from the HSR is the milk 
oozing from the breasts of Mahārisī Kali’s wife, which the 
woman took for a sign that she should raise the abandoned 
child as her own (see Zieseniss 1963: 17). Possibly these 
examples are akin or hark back to an Indian folk-belief that 
a cow spontaneously secretes milk on seeing her own calf 
(see Brockington and Brockington 2006: 393, n. 13).
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   158 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 167] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan159
Fig. 8.7: Meeting between Sītā and Hanumān in the Aśoka-grove. (Reproduced from Kats [1925]: Plate XXXV)
Fig. 8.7a: Sītā caressing Trijaṭā’s head (particular of Fig. 8.7) Fig. 8.7b: A reciprocal sign of intimacy: Trijatā’s 
hand on Sītā’s hip (particular of Fig. 8.7)
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   159 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 168] ---
Roy E. Jordaan160
Vibhīṣaṇa’s alleged daughter she is of royal descent. 
For this reason he could not support van Stein Cal -
lenfels’ identification of the curly-haired woman in 
the second part (Fig. 8.7b) as Kalā (whose name he 
‘read’ or re-interpreted as Trijaṭā). Next, Kats pro-
posed a compromise of sorts by taking the woman 
in the first part for a female slave and identifying 
the other crowned companion as Trijaṭā. Kats 
continued the identification of the woman in the 
second part as Kalā. In their separate discussions 
of the relief under review, Jan Fontein (1997) and 
Levin do not offer any useful new insights. Saran 
and Khanna, finally, refer to the two women in 
the first part as, respectively, a ‘companion’ of Sītā 
and a female attendant, and to the women in the 
second part as Sītā and her companion Trijaṭā. 
What remains unclear is whether it concerns two 
different companions or the same one, Trijaṭā.
In my opinion, the intimate gesture of Sītā’s 
hand on the female attendant’s head in the first 
part and the reciprocal sign of intimacy of the 
female attendant’s hand on Sītā’s hip in the second 
part provide the clue for resolving this double 
riddle. Because of the familiarity and intimacy 
expressed by these gestures, I propose that the 
‘female slave’ or ‘female attendant’ is Trijaṭā. In 
contradistinction to VR, Trijaṭā is not an old 
rākṣasī, but a young and friendly looking woman.41 
As I do not agree with Stutterheim’s sleight of 
hand, infusing Trijaṭā with royal blood through 
Vibhīṣaṇa, I think there is more to be said for iden -
tifying the other crowned woman as Mandodarī, 
which is in line with the amended interpretation 
of the previous relief.
frightful news about the battle  
in laṅkā
The next relevant scene is depicted in the eleventh 
relief of the Brahmā temple, which again shows Sītā 
together with a royal lady, while a female attendant 
at their feet apparently informs them of the exciting 
developments in the battle in Laṅkā (see Fig. 8.8). 
41. For the development of Trijaṭā from an old rākṣasī to 
Sītā’s young confidante (in the course of which Kalā was 
almost completely ignored), I refer the reader to Bulcke’s 
1964 article.For unknown reasons, in Stutterheim’s work 
a photograph and a discussion of this scene are 
missing. Fontein confines himself to remarking 
that here we see Sītā with her companion Trijaṭā.42 
In her identification, Levin refers to ‘royal cap -
tives’ in the Aśoka Garden awaiting the outcome 
of the war. She refers to sentences in the OJR where 
another anonymous female prisoner, who tries to 
encourage Sītā, is supposedly featured.43 Although 
it is said of this woman that she was ‘a human 
being of good lineage in distress’, I do not believe 
she can be the woman in question, in view of her 
crown, which attests to her royal status and thus 
more than just ‘good lineage’.
A new proposal on the relief is advanced  
by Saran and Khanna, who associate the royal 
captive with Mandodarī and defend their view as 
follows:
‘All previous interpretations have identified the 
scene here as depicting the kneeling Trijata 
informing Sita of the impending victory of 
Rama’s forces. This would seem plausible were 
42. Fontein 1997: 195.
43. Levin 1999: 201. In the accompanying endnote, Levin 
refers to OJR 17.135–137 but she admits that Soewito Santoso, 
the Indonesian editor and translator of the said kakavin, 
was in doubt about the presence in the Aśoka-garden of a 
female captive other than Sītā. With Vālmīki such a royal 
captive is missing.
Fig. 8.8: Sītā, Mandodarī and Trijaṭā. (Photo: author) 
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   160 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 169] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan161
it not for the fact that the supposed figure of Sita 
on the right is shown without an aureole; and if 
the haloed figure on the left is Sita, why then is 
she seated at a lower level than her companion? 
The crowned figure seated at a higher level than 
the haloed princess, who must be Sita, could be 
Queen Mandodari, given that in the following 
relief she mourns the death of Ravana. In the 
Hikayat story, Mandodari recognizes Sita Dewi 
as her daughter by the milk that starts to flow 
from her breasts.’44 
Saran and Khanna’s identification of the two 
women as Sītā and Mandodarī is in my opinion 
the most plausible. Supporting their identification 
of Sītā with the lower sitting haloed figure and the 
other higher sitting woman as Mandodarī is that the 
more elevated position of the latter is based not only 
on her status as queen but also on the hierarchical 
distinction between parents and children that we 
found in the second relief on the Śiva temple. 
Whether Mandodarī recognized Sītā as her 
daughter from the milk oozing from her breasts 
can obviously not be deduced from the reliefs under 
discussion, but it seems likely that the audience was 
familiar with this folk motif. If so, this would offer 
yet another example of ‘implied narrative’. Saran 
and Khanna, however, neglect to follow through 
the interpretative implications of the kinship rela-
tionship between Mandodarī and Sītā.
the identities of the  
royal female attendants at 
rāvaṇa’s funeral
The next relief is often referred to as ‘the death of 
Rāvaṇa’, which, as said, is somewhat inaccurate 
since it is not so much the slaying that is depicted 
here, as Rāvaṇa’s corpse on top of a funeral pyre 
(see Figs. 8.1 and 8.9). It seems safer to identify the 
relief as the wake for Rāvaṇa, as Saran and Khanna 
actually do in their discussion:
The lifeless form of the multi-headed, multi-
armed Ravana lies prostrate on a decorated bier 
surrounded by his grieving consorts. On the 
44. Saran and Khanna 2004: 67.extreme left is the most striking of the female 
mourners; with a royal halo, she is undoubtedly 
Queen Mandodari, about to lay a garland 
of flowers at the feet of her dead husband. 
The emotion of compassion, or karuna rasa, 
which permeates Valmiki’s account of the 
lamentation of Queen Mandodari and Ravana’s 
other consorts, is ably captured here.45 
This interpretation of the relief should, I think, be 
adjusted on one particular point. If we accept the 
previous identification of the haloed figure as Sītā, 
it should, for reasons of consistency, follow that the 
haloed figure in the present relief is identified as 
Sītā, which Saran and Khanna do not do. Instead 
they now connect the halo with Mandodarī, and 
no longer refer to Sītā. It is as if Sītā had remained 
in the Aśoka-garden.
There is, however, one matter that makes Sītā’s 
presence at the wake plausible, namely the odd 
number of five attending women, rather than four 
as one would expect of Rāvaṇa’s queen-consorts.46 
The four main consorts, according to the HSR, are 
Queen Mandodarī (Rāvaṇa’s senior wife), Nīla 
Utama (the goddess of Heaven), Pәrtivī Devī 
(the goddess of the Netherworld) and Gaṅga 
Mahā Devī (the goddess of the Sea). The three 
women with the ornamented hairdos who stand 
on Rāvaṇa’s right-hand side can be identified with 
the three above mentioned goddesses.47 As for the 
two women at Rāvaṇa’s feet, Sītā, if present, is 
either the crowned and haloed figure who places 
a wreath over Rāvaṇa’s lower legs, or the woman 
standing next to her, whose head is so severely 
damaged that it can no longer be ascertained 
whether she once wore a crown and a nimbus. 
Going by the contours and oval shape of the 
remains of her headdress, however, she probably 
wore a crown and a nimbus (see Fig. 8.9). Be that 
as it may, it seems more plausible to identify the 
45. Ibid.: 68.
46. Earlier Stutterheim (1989: 145) also identified these 
women as Mandodarī and four (rather than three) uniden-
tified co-wives. Co-wives or queen-consorts should be dis-
tinguished from concubines, anonymous wives of lower 
standing, whose total numbers run into the hundreds for 
both Rāvaṇa and Daśaratha.
47. See Zieseniss 1963: 9, 105.
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   161 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 170] ---
Roy E. Jordaan162
queen garlanding Rāvaṇa’s feet as Mandodarī 
than as Sītā. The leading position accords with 
Mandodarī’s status as chief consort, but seems 
irreconcilable with Sītā’s hatred of demons. Indeed, 
in all accounts of Sītā’s birth as Rāvaṇa’s biological 
or adoptive daughter, she is immediately hostile 
or predicted to be hostile towards the demon-king 
and his dynasty, as in the Thai tale cited above. In 
several accounts she is specifically reborn hostile, 
in retaliation for Rāvaṇa’s former maltreatment 
of her, as is the case in the two Jain texts referred 
to earlier in this article. 
As I do not know of a Rāma-story that mentions 
Sītā’s presence at Rāvaṇa’s wake, I cannot tell what 
her motives were for doing so, except to recall 
Rāma’s argument when persuading Vibhīṣaṇa 
to arrange a decent funeral for his elder brother, 
Rāvaṇa, namely that ‘death cancels out enmity’. 
Aside from this, one must consider the parent-child 
relationship, which, as we saw in previous reliefs, 
involves considerations of subordination, obedi -
ence and respect. Thus Sītā may have attended the 
funeral out of piety or sympathy for her mother, 
or she may have obeyed her mother’s wishes to this effect. One might venture to suggest that the 
visual hints at Candi Prambanan about the com-
pliance of children with their parents’ decisions 
had a special meaning for the Javanese royalty at 
the time. To demonstrate this, however, would 
require separate historical research into the com-
plicated dynastic situation in Central Java around 
the mid-9th century.
conclusion and questions  
for further research
The query whether Sītā’s presence at Rāvaṇa’s wake 
could be accounted for by her descent from the 
slain demon king was the starting point for this 
review of current scholarship on the most relevant 
reliefs, both on the Śiva and Brahmā temples.48 In 
48. As far as I can see, no further clues about Sītā’s birth 
and descent can be found in the reliefs on the Brahmā 
temple successive to Rāvaṇa’s wake. But it is conceivable 
that rumours about Sītā’s presence there might have 
inspired Rāma’s subsequent harsh treatment of Sītā in many 
Southeast Asian written versions.
Fig. 8.9: Another look at the wake for Rāvaṇa. (Photo courtesy Rijksmuseum Amsterdam)
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   162 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 171] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan163
this review, a number of crucial shortcomings were 
discussed, including two earlier ones of my own. 
It also shows that these flaws could be corrected 
if one proceeds from the idea that Sītā as depicted 
in the Rāmāyaṇa of Candi Prambanan is indeed 
Rāvaṇa’s daughter.
But what are the art historical implications 
of this conclusion for our understanding of the 
lost oral or the written text that was followed at 
Prambanan? It seems to me that the most im -
portant implication is the refutation of Bulcke’s 
authoritative claim that the sculptors of Pramba-
nan’s bas-reliefs kept closely to VR and the OJR, 
except for a few minor divergences that could be 
explained through the much later popular Malay 
version of the hikayats .49 What is amazing is Bul-
cke’s claim that only a few, perhaps even no traces 
in the heterogenic mass of deviations from the 
hikayat could be detected at Candi Prambanan, 
while his principal source on this matter, Stut -
terheim’s doctoral thesis, had demonstrated the 
very opposite to be true. Stutterheim’s explorative 
and unavoidably incomplete study highlighted 
no less than thirteen important deviations from 
Vālmīki’s text, no fewer than nine of which could 
be clarified with the aid of the hikayats . In the 
meantime, Stutterheim’s findings have not only 
been confirmed by succeeding researchers, but 
multiplied with other examples. The present article 
argues that this is also true for the topic of Sītā’s 
birth, which was the focus of Bulcke’s research 
and can definitely not be considered a matter of 
secondary importance.
The fact that the lost text that was followed at 
Candi Prambanan resembled the Malay hikayats 
in so many ways, caused Kats to claim that ‘the 
Malay “Hikayat Seri Rama” is represented in the 
reliefs of the Prambanan temple in Central Java’, 
and Stuart Robson to suggest a ‘derivation of the 
Prambanan reliefs not from Kakawin but from a 
proto-Hikayat Seri Rama’.50 Both these statements, 
I feel, are open to serious objections.
First, the Rāma-story presented in the hikayats 
diverges in many important ways from the one 
49. See Bulcke 1952: 112, n. 1.
50. Kats 1927: 583; Robson 1980: 12–13.depicted in the Prambanan reliefs. Unlike them, 
which begin with Viṣṇu’s imminent incarnation as 
Rāma, the hikayats  commonly begin with Rāvaṇa’s 
genealogy and adventures. Examples of other diver -
gences are the absence of the sage-king Mahārisī 
Kali during the svayaṃvara, as well as the omission 
of the second part of the archery contest, the shoot -
ing of an arrow through forty tāl-trees, in which 
Rāvaṇa participated. Particularly important is that 
in the HSR the fertility-inducing ritual on behalf of 
the childless King Daśaratha resulted in the birth of 
five children, four sons and one daughter, whereas 
in the second relief of the Śiva temple at Prambanan 
only four sons are depicted. Absent is Kīkevī Devī, 
the daughter of the junior queen Baliadari.
Second, the HSR itself contains many affinities 
both with other Southeast Asian Rāma-stories and 
a number of Indian recensions of the Rāmāyaṇa  
that still deserve further investigation.51 Such affini -
ties may be useful for a hypothetical reconstruction 
of the text that served as the model for the story 
that was depicted at Prambanan.
The third objection, which is closely connect-
ed with my last point, is the real danger that the 
peoples in the Indo-Malay world will be held 
responsible for some of the divergences that, 
because of their unusual and confusing character, 
have already resulted in the use of such pejora -
tive terms as bizarre, fantastic, bowdlerisation, 
etc. In a sense such characterizations are akin to 
the early 19th-century ones, rightly criticized by 
Stutterheim, in which the divergences from VR  
were attributed to a combination of ignorance, 
misunderstanding, and carelessness on the part 
of the Javanese artisans and sculptors. However, 
anyone who is acquainted with the account of the 
conception and birth of Sītā in the Kashmirian 
Adbhuta-Rāmāyaṇa will agree that this text is no 
less astonishing than the Southeast Asian render-
ings, and that the possibility cannot be ignored 
that some of the strange or extraordinary adjust-
ments originated in India.52 One relevant example 
51. See the remarks to this effect by Stutterheim (1989: 
73–81) and Zieseniss (1963: 181–188). Jordaan (2011) offers 
an example of this approach in which the focus is on the 
episode of the construction of the causeway to Laṅkā.
52. For a summary of the Adbhuta-Rāmāyaṇa, see  
Grierson (1926). 
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   163 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 172] ---
Roy E. Jordaan164
is provided by a folktale from Gujarat in which 
a third of Daśaratha’s sacrificial drink is stolen 
by an eagle.53 In this folktale the pāyasa is eaten 
by Añjanī, who gives birth to Hanumān, but it is 
easy to see how an imaginative bard might have 
used the idea as a starting point for a new version 
of the Rāma-story in which the birth of Rāma is 
linked to that of Sītā and other figures. 
Let us in this connection return briefly to the 
finding that in the HSR the fertility-inducing 
ceremony resulted in the birth of five children, 
four sons and one daughter, whereas at Candi 
Prambanan only the four sons are depicted. The 
absence of Kīkevī Devī and the presence of two 
crows in the second relief raise the question about 
the number of rice-balls in the basket, and of what 
might have happened to the fifth and the sixth 
rice-balls (assuming that the two crows were re -
sponsible for the theft of one rice-ball each). The 
only solution I can think of is that at Prambanan 
two crows may indeed have been involved in the 
theft of one rice-ball each, whereas in the HSR ren -
dition the involvement of one of these crows was 
lost.54 This possibly concerns the loss of the demon 
Gāgak Nāsir, who in the hikayat commits misdeeds 
very similar to those committed by Gāgak Svāra, 
notably the defilement of sacrifices. Proceeding 
from this hypothetical scenario, Rāvaṇa did not 
receive one but two rice-balls. According to the 
HSR he ate one rice-ball himself, which resulted  
53. See Stutterheim 1989: 73, whose reference is to a sup-
plementary note by R.E. Enthoven (1912: 41) on the folklore 
of Gujarat.
54. The involvement of a second crow can hardly be 
deduced from the early photograph by Cephas that is re -
produced in the folio volume with plans and illustrations 
that accompanied Groneman’s report on the excavation of 
Candi Prambanan. Luckily, Jeffrey Sundberg was willing to 
take close-up photographs of the second relief of the Śiva 
temple when he was in Indonesia to participate in a summer 
course in premodern Javanese Art History in Yogyakarta. I 
was surprised to see that the right-hand panel, which since 
the days of Groneman had been assumed to have been lost, 
had been re-installed, apparently without proper notification 
in archaeological reports. Sundberg’s photographs not only 
confirmed my hunch about the involvement of a second bird 
in the theft, but also revealed several other as yet enigmatic 
iconographic details (see the main text).in the birth of Sītā. What happened to the other 
stolen rice-ball is anyone’s guess. It is conceivable 
that in the hypothetical scenario at Prambanan, 
Rāvaṇa really did offer the second rice-ball to his 
Queen Mandodarī, which resulted in the birth of 
a son, who was Sītā’s brother and perhaps even her 
twin. Regrettably I did not succeed in finding a 
relief at Candi Prambanan in which this brother 
might be depicted.
The existence of a (twin) brother of Sītā finds 
some support in the Rāma-literature, namely in the 
Paümacariya  of Vimalasūri, a Jain rendering from 
the 6th century CE. However, unlike the miracu-
lous course of events at Prambanan, the concep-
tion and birth of the twin sister and brother here 
proceed naturally. Yet the possibility cannot be 
dismissed a priori that an Indian tale once existed 
in which the birth of the twins was combined with 
the motif of the theft of the rice-balls by two crows, 
which later served as a prototype for the Pramba-
nan Rāma-story. The chance discovery of such a 
tale would go a long way towards meeting John 
Brockington’s observation that ‘the question of 
Sītā’s parentage is one motif by which it is possible 
perhaps to trace the linkages between the different 
versions of the Rāma story.’55
At present it is still too early to mention a 
specific text as the prototype for the Prambanan 
Rāma-story, and perhaps only further research in 
India can set us on its track, if this is still possible 
at all. It is beyond doubt that there already were 
‘many Rāmāyaṇas’ in ancient Java as well as in 
India, where the story originated. All the same and 
whatever the difficulties inherent in this kind of 
research, it remains worthwhile to establish what 
areas in India have Rāma-stories that come closest 
to the Prambanan Rāmāyaṇa. Stutterheim for one 
was convinced that the results of such an inves -
tigation could tell us more about the regions in 
India that the bearers of the oral and written story 
hailed from. He himself singled out several possible 
regions of origin, in which Gujarat in particular 
scored highly. Lacking the time and opportunity 
to take up research in this direction myself, I must 
leave it at the conclusion of the present article that 
55. John Brockington 1985: 261.
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   164 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 173] ---
Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s Daughter at Candi Prambanan165
the Sītā of Prambanan is Rāvaṇa’s daughter. This 
finding implies that the origin of this notion can 
be traced back much further than the 13th century 
date assigned to the Roorda van Eysinga edition 
of the HSR and the 18th century date of the Thai 
Rāmakīen. Indeed, rather than seeking to derive 
the Prambanan reliefs from a proto-HSR , it makes 
more sense to trace back both the HSR and the 
Rāmakīen to a text that had also served as a guide 
for the Javanese sculptors of these reliefs. Based on 
the most conservative founding date of the major 
shrines in the central courtyard of the Prambanan 
temple-complex, the terminus ante quem for this 
idea in the Southeast Asian source tradition can 
now be fixed at the mid-9th century. 
References
Achadiati Ikram. 1980. Hikayat Sri Rama: suntin -
gan naskah disertai telaah amanat dan struk -
tur. PhD dissertation, Universitas Indonesia, 
Jakarta.
Barrett, E.C.G. 1963. ‘Further light on Sir Richard 
Winstedt’s “undescribed Malay version of the 
Rāmāyaṇa”’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
and African Studies 26: 531–543.
Brakel, Lode F. 1980. ‘Two Indian epics in Malay’, 
Archipel 20: 143–160.
Brockington, John L. 1985. Righteous Rāma: The 
Evolution of an Epic. Delhi: Oxford University 
Press.
. 2007. ‘Sītā Janakātmaja’, in Monika 
Nowakowska and Jacek Wozniak (eds.), Thea-
trum Mirabiliorum Indiae Orientalis: A volume 
to celebrate the 70th birthday of Professor Maria 
Krzystof Byrski, pp. 82–89. Warszawa: Dom 
Wydawniczy Elipsa.
Brockington, John and Mary Brockington. 2006. 
Rāma the Steadfast. London: Penguin Classics.
Brockington, Mary. 2012. ‘The ladies’ monkey: 
Hanumān in Boston’, Journal Asiatique 300/1: 
199–214.
Bulcke, Camille. 1952. ‘La naissance de Sītā’, Bulletin 
de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 46/1: 
107–118.
. 1964. ‘Sītā’s friend Trijaṭā’, Indian Anti -
quary, Third Series 1/1: 55–63.De Clercq, Eva. 2011. ‘A note on Sītā as Rāvaṇa’s 
daughter in the Jain Rāmāyaṇa’, Journal of 
Vaishnava Studies 20/1: 197–207.
Dozon, A. 1846. ‘Étude sur le roman malay de 
Sri-Rāma’, Journal Asiatique 7: 425–471.
Enthoven, R.E. 1912. ‘The folklore of Gujarat’, 
Indian Antiquary 41, supp. 37–72.
Evans, Kirsti. 1997. Epic narratives in the Hoysaḷa 
temples: The Rāmāyaṇa, Mahābhārata and 
Bhāgavata Purāṇa in Halebid, Belur and 
Amṛtapura. Leiden/New York/Köln: Brill.
Fontein, Jan. 1997. ‘Preliminary notes on the 
narrative reliefs of Candi Brahmā and Candi 
Viṣṇu at Loro Jonggrang, Prambanan’, in 
Natasha Eilenberg, M.C. Subhadradis Diskul, 
and Robert L. Brown (eds.), Living a life in 
accord with dhamma: Papers in honor of 
Professor Jean Boisselier on his eightieth birthday, 
pp. 191–204. Bangkok: Silpakorn University.
Gerth van Wijk, D. 1891. ‘Iets over verschillende 
Maleische redactiën van den Seri Rama’, 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 34: 401–434.
Grierson, George. 1926. ‘On the Adbhuta-
Ramayana’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental 
Studies 5: 285–301.
Groneman, Isaac. 1893. Tjandi Parambanan  
op Midden-Java, na de ontgraving; Met lichtd-
rukken van Cephas. 2 vols. Leiden: Koninklijk 
Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 
van Nederlandsch-Indië.
Hussein, Ismail. 1980. ‘Ramayana in Malaysia’, in 
Venkatarama Raghavan (ed.), The Rāmāyaṇa 
tradition in Asia, pp. 142–154. New Delhi: 
Sahitya Akademi.
Jordaan, Roy. 2011. ‘The causeway episode of the 
Prambanan Rāmāyaṇa reexamined’, in Andrea 
Acri, Helen Creese, and Arlo Griffiths (eds.), 
From Laṅkā Eastwards: The Rāmāyana in 
the Literature and Visual Arts of Indonesia,  
pp. 179–207. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Kats, J. [1925]. Het Rȃmȃyana  op Javaansche tempel 
reliefs/The Ramayana as sculptured in reli[e]fs 
in Javanese temples. Batavia: Kolff.
. 1927. ‘The Rāmāyaṇa in Indonesia’, Bulletin 
of the School of Oriental Studies 4/3: 579–585.
Kern, Hendrik (author); van der Molen, Willem 
(ed.). 2015. Rāmāyaṇa. The story of Rāma 
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   165 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 174] ---
Roy E. Jordaan166
and Sītā in Old Javanese. Romanized Edition 
by Willem van der Molen. Tokyo: Research 
Institute for Languages and Cultures of  
Asia and Africa, Tokyo University of Foreign 
Studies.
Kulkarni, V.M. 1959. ‘The origin and development 
of the Rāma story in Jaina literature’, Journal 
of the Oriental Institute, Baroda 9/2: 189–204, 
284–304.
Levin, Cecelia. 1999. The Rāmāyaṇa of Loro 
Jonggrang: Indian antecedents and Javanese 
impetus. PhD dissertation, Institute of Fine 
Arts, New York.
Noorduyn, Jacobus. 1971. ‘Traces of an Old 
Sundanese Ramayana tradition’, Indonesia: 
151–157.
Olsson, Ray A. 1968. The Rāmakīen: a prose 
translation of the Thai Rāmayāṇa. Bangkok: 
Praepittaya.
Raghavan, Venkatarama. 1975. The Rāmāyaṇa in 
Greater India. Surat: South Gujarat University.
Robson, Stuart. 1980. ‘The Rāmāyaṇa in early Java’, 
South East Asian Review 5/2: 5–17.
. 2015. Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa. A New 
English Translation with an Introduction and 
Notes. Tokyo: Research Institute for Languages 
and Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo 
University of Foreign Studies.
Saran, Malini and Vinod C. Khanna. 2004. The 
Ramayana in Indonesia. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.Singaravelu, Sivakumar. 1982. ‘Sītā’s birth and 
parentage in the Rāma story’, Asian Folklore 
Studies 41/2: 235–343.
. 2004. The Ramayana tradition in South-  
east Asia. Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya 
Press.
van Stein Callenfels, Pieter V. 1919. ‘De Ramayana-
reliefs op den Çiwa-tempel te Prambanan’, in 
M. Lulius van Goor (ed.), Korte gids voor de 
tempelbouwvallen in de Prambanan-vlakte, 
het Diëng-plateau en Gedong Sanga, pp. 32–43 
(Bijlage II). Weltevreden: Landsdrukkerij.
Stutterheim, Willem F. 1989. Rāma-legends and 
Rāma-reliefs. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi 
National Centre for the Arts and Abhinav 
Publications. [Translated from German by 
C.D. Paliwal and R.P. Jain.]
Sweeney, P.L. Amin. 1987. A full hearing. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Velder, Christian. 1968. ‘Notes on the saga of Rama 
in Thailand’, Journal of the Siam Society 56/1: 
33–46.
Vogel, Jean Ph. 1921. ‘Het eerste Rāma relief van 
Prambanan’, Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en 
Volkenkunde 77: 202–215.
Zieseniss, Alexander. 1963. The Rāma Saga 
in Malaysia: Its Origin and Development. 
Singapore: Malaysian Sociological Research 
Institute. [Translated from German by P.W. 
Burch.]
08_CreSouthV2_3P_19Jun22.indd   166 22/6/22   7:32 PM

--- [Page 175] ---
Chapter 9
Hydro-architectonic Conceptualizations in Central Javanese, 
Khmer, and South Indian Religious Architecture:  
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga  Mechanism  
for the Consecration of Water*
introduction1
The perceptive Dutch anthropologist and Java 
scholar Roy Jordaan spent a great deal of time 
documenting the Śaiva temple complex at Pramba -
nan, collating prior scholarship on the temple and 
contemplating its many extant mysteries. Among 
the fruits of his efforts was a conceptualization that 
consistently explained a number of curious features 
of the temple’s core complex: the thesis that the 
entire inner courtyard was intermittently flooded, 
creating a giant tīrtha at the sacred site so as to in 
* It should be noted that the author of this chapter resisted 
several editorial recommendations on style, terminology, 
and content. As a result, Andrea Acri would like to disclaim 
his editorial responsibility.Jeffrey Sundberg
effect re-create the fabled Ocean of Milk, a sight 
which must have been so dramatic and majestic 
as to signal far and wide the elemental importance 
of Central Java across the Hindu-Buddhist world 
at the time. Jordaan’s thesis has not received the 
measure of scholarly appreciation it deserves. The 
present chapter seeks to amend that situation by 
solidifying Jordaan’s thesis and amplifying it into 
previously unexplored directions. 
So far as I am aware, there has yet to be a 
study suggesting how the Śaiva temple complex at 
Prambanan actually functioned and what rituals 
1. I would like to dedicate this chapter to my admired 
late friend Roy Jordaan, whose engagingly written and 
compellingly argued work In Praise of Prambanan 
captured my attention and motivated my own inquiries 
into the wonders of Central Javanese archaeology. Though 
my own understandings of Central Javanese history 
have evolved from the two-dynasty conceptualization 
that serves as a substrate for aspects of Roy’s analysis, I 
have found that through the nearly two decades of our 
acquaintance, Roy had been an unfailingly knowledgeable 
sounding board for ideas, a helpful critic, and a critical 
resource, always recalling some obscure century-old 
archaeological reference and understanding its sudden 
significance in light of newer data. I am grateful for Roy’s 
mentorship and friendship, and can only hope that essays 
such as the present one are fitting tribute to the time that 
he has invested in improving my writings and inquiries. 
We modern admirers of the ruins of Java’s Hindu-
Buddhist civilization have to thank the fine imagination 
and tenacious advocacy of Roy Jordaan for this great 
enrichment of our understanding. A succession of kindnesses led to the present chapter 
and deserve to be thanked. Peter Sharrock generously 
extended an invitation to participate in the Alphawood 
SOAS-UGM 2017 conference in Yogyakarta, where John 
Guy serendipitously displayed an image of the Ci Aruteun 
river boulder to the seminar and provided information on 
the riverine inscriptions of the Tārumānagara kingdom 
of West Java that stimulated the train of thought that 
led to this chapter. I am also thankful to Peter Sharrock 
and Emma Bunker for pointing out the pertinence of the array of a thousand liṅgas (sahasraliṅga) on the riverbed at Kbal Spean; to Swati Chemburkar and Hunter Watson 
for a number of useful dialogues as well as for permission 
to use their photographs; to Abira Bhattacharya, Emma 
Bunker, Swati Chemburkar, Phyllis Granoff, Peter 
Sharrock, and Emma Stein for rummaging through their 
mental inventories for other instances of Śiva statues on 
yonis; to Véronique Degroot for a generous number of 
useful materials; to Ania Nugrahani for bibliographic 
pointers to publications on the newly-uncovered Liangan temple and the yoni there; to Corinna Wessels-Mevissen, 
Gerd Mevissen, and Liesbeth Pankaja Bennink for 
drawing attention to the flooding of other South Indian 
temple courtyards; to Janneke Koster and Arnoud Haag 
for clarifications of material presently in the National 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   167 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 176] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg168
were carried on in it. This chapter will argue that 
although the paramount ritual focus of the Pram -
banan temple was the consecration of water by 
its lustral flow over the towering erect statue of 
Śiva mounted on a yoni (as well as similar yo -
ni-mounted statues of Brahmā and Viṣṇu in their 
respective temples), there was a collateral produc -
tion of large quantities of sanctified water flowing 
over a thousand hitherto-unrecognized liṅga s that 
studded the balustrades and superstructures of 
the eight largest temples in Prambanan’s central 
courtyard. In this sense, the Prambanan temple 
serves principally as a mechanism for the passive 
production of consecrated water. The scale of 
this vast and elegant holy water production mon -
ument was unrivalled in premodern Asia, and 
comparable only with ‘purification sculptures’, 
Śivaliṅgas carved into the rocky beds of natural 
rivers such as at Kbal Spean in Cambodia. I hope 
that the reader will come to share Jordaan’s and 
my conviction that the Śaiva temple at Pramba-
nan counts among the astounding conceptual 
formulations undertaken by the Javanese in their 
extraordinary kingdom.
After a rehearsal of the elements of Jordaan’s 
analysis, the present chapter will show that a 
number of the contemporaneous Indic or Indi -
cized kingdoms incorporated standing or moving 
water as an element in their own sacred architec-
ture, either as embellishment or else as a sacralized 
product. The Javanese themselves had advanced a 
consecration-by-contact system of sanctification 
as early as the Tārumānagara kingdom of West 
Java, and the practice is also contemporaneously 
attested in Central Java. The employment of water 
in the largest Śaiva temple in insular Southeast 
Asia—indeed, as the world’s largest Śaiva temple 
complex until the Bṛhadīśvara temple of Rājarā-
jacōḷa and the Gaṅgaikoṇḍacōḻapuram temple of 
Rājendra Cōḻa from more than a century and a half Fig. 9.1: A rare panoptic view of the immense, three-
metre high Śiva image standing on its one-metre-high 
yoni , with the statue supplanting the liṅga . Equally 
impressive monoliths of Brahmā and Viṣṇu stand on 
yonis  in the other two major temple edifices in the 
central courtyard. OD 820. Courtesy of the Leiden 
University Library.
later, Prambanan was almost certainly a premium 
state temple expressive of the majesty and bril -
liance of the Javanese kingdom—will be seen as an 
innovative and deeply knowledgeable Central Ja-
vanese variation on well-established Śaiva themes, 
a clever and sophisticated conceptualization that 
would garner admiration for its sponsors in their 
interactions with foreign kings and priests. This 
hydro-centric innovation, I will suggest, lay at the 
heart of the Prambanan construction in primarily 
three forms. 
Museum of Indonesia; to Umakanta Mishra and Hunter 
Watson for their generous help in thrashing through 
the Sanskrit in Sañjaya’s Canggal inscription and in the 
Purāṇas; to Rolf Giebel for useful editorial feedback; to 
Osmund Bopearachchi for his help with photographs; to 
Kurt Kroboth for his assistance parsing the fine points of 
the French descriptions of the Kbal Spean; to Jonathan Zilberg for access to critical resources; and especially to 
Peter Jordaan for his many beneficial insights concerning 
the Prambanan temple as well as immensely enthusiastic 
production of graphics. In South India, both Valérie Gillet 
and Emmanuel Francis have provided unfailingly helpful advice and references, and also contributed photographs 
to the chapter.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   168 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 177] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water169
Figs. 9.2a, 9.2b: Top (a): A diagram of the Prambanan temple, indicating the three major, three minor, and two 
supplementary temples within the courtyard. Map adapted and modified by Peter Jordaan from the Wikipedia 
contribution of Gunawan Kartapranata at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Prambanan_Temple_Compound_
Map_en.svg. Bottom (b): A closer focus on the central courtyard, indicating the positions of all of the major 
depictions of deities. Map courtesy of Peter Jordaan.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   169 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 178] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg170
The first of these innovative Javanese concep-
tualizations was the choice of a conceptually novel 
placement of an erect statue of Śiva—a vyakta-  
liṅga—on the yoni instead of the conventional 
pairing of an aniconic śivaliṅga and a yoni. In 
the principal Prambanan garbhagṛha, the deity 
is present as an icon, and the principal product 
of worship is the lustration water that runs from 
the praṇāla spout after being ladled over some 
part of the statue. (This ritual lustration of Śiva’s 
statue would have been accompanied by similar 
lustrations of the yoni-mounted Brahmā and Viṣṇu 
statues in their respective temples). At least in this 
sense, the Prambanan temple must have served as 
a ‘holy water machine’.
The second of these Javanese innovations 
was the studding of the temple complex with a 
conglomeration of liṅgas—precisely, a holy thou-
sand-liṅga ( sahasraliṅga) array—hitherto unrecog -
nized because of their abstracted representation in 
a ribbed and bulbous bell-like form. Reference to 
the 11th-century Khmer Kbal Spean riverine site, 
the inscriptions of which specify its function as a 
sahasraliṅga site of one thousand liṅgas, allows the 
recognition of the presence of analogous features at 
Prambanan. There the sahasraliṅgas served as the 
consecrating mechanism, not for rainwater rushing 
through the channels of a Cambodian riverbed 
that was mythically likened to the Descent of the 
Ganges, but for the rainfall into the Javanese temple 
courtyard. In this way the sacred and sanctifying 
features installed on the exterior of the Prambanan 
temple passively accomplished, on a massive scale, 
that which was acquired through the efforts of the 
priest within its sanctums. 
The third of these Javanese hydro-centric in -
novations is the interpretation of the accumulated 
sanctified rainfall in the courtyard as the cosmog-
onic Ocean of Milk, which itself hosted a threefold 
‘Arising of the Liṅga’ (liṅgodbhava) symbolism 
centred upon those three mahāliṅgas of the sa -
hasraliṅgas that serve as the principal spires of the 
three primary deva shrines, centred directly above 
the yoni-mounted mahādevas Śiva, Brahmā, and 
Viṣṇu in the garbhagṛhas and also directly above 
the temple foundation pits. These three mahāde-
vas, I argue, are not the conventionally accepted 
trimūrti, but (lower, embodied) manifestations of Śiva’s threefold triguṇa qualities of rajas, tamas, 
and sattva.2
2. Since the time of the revelation that the mammoth statue 
of Śiva lay buried in the central cella and that Prambanan 
was principally oriented to that god, there is a longstanding 
awareness that despite the presence of Prambanan’s dedi-
cated temples to Brahmā and Viṣṇu (on yonis), the Pram-
banan ensemble constituted a thoroughly Śaivized complex. 
Possibly because of the distracting presence of a trimūrti 
concept of three co-equal gods, most prior scholars such 
as Ijzerman, Krom, Bosch, and Vogel avoided expressing 
interpretations that too emphatically posited that all—the 
Brahmā and Viṣṇu statues found upon yonis—were mani-
festations of Śiva and were instead reduced to merely hinting 
at a Śaiva cast to features on the Brahmā and Viṣṇu temples 
and in the Vaiṣṇava tales (e.g. Krom’s device of terming 
the sculpted, spouted, nāga-supported monolith on which 
the large Brahmā and Viṣṇu statues stand as ‘yoni-shaped pedestal’ [see Jordaan 1996b: 149], while Bosch [1922: 67; 
Jordaan 1996b: 153] was left to mention but not interpret 
the trident symbols of the twenty-seven ṛṣis who surround the Brahmā temple). While the Śaiva preeminence is now 
acknowledged—I wish to draw attention to Véronique 
Degroot’s (2013: 44) fresh observations on the thematic 
correlations between the subsidiary Śaiva deities Agastya 
and Mahiṣāsuramardinī and the Brahmā and Viṣṇu temples, 
and Thomas Hunter’s observations (Degroot 2013: 37–40) 
of the strategic intrusions of Śaiva trident-bearing ṛṣis who 
direct Rāma in scenes of significance in the Rāmāyaṇa—
more recent scholarship has been more forward in posi -
tioning Brahmā and Viṣṇu as not just subordinate but as 
emanations of Śiva: Acri and Jordaan (2012) discuss their own substantial clarification of the guardian dikpālas and 
digbhandas, including novel identifications of Brahmā and 
Viṣṇu among them, that surround the Śiva temple, joining 
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw (1955), Hooykaas (1966), and Gou-
driaan and Hooykaas (1971) in noting that not only are 
these figures among the nearest elements of Śiva’s āvaraṇa 
(entourage), but that they are indeed emanations of Śiva.
 So far as I know, no prior source has formally identified 
the large Viṣṇu and Brahmā statues as immediate triguṇa principles—tattvas—of Śiva, nor has any source noted the 
correspondence between their locations and the description 
in such texts as the Liṅgapurāṇa. I point to Purāṇic passages 
that will be much met in this chapter as I am convinced that 
a text or texts approximating the Liṅgapurāṇa explain much 
of Prambanan’s core symbolisms and intentions. (Con -
foundingly for the study of Śaivism in the kingdoms of 
Matarām and Galuh, the Old Javanese text Pratasti Bhuvana  
[Leiden University Oriental Manuscripts Collection Cod. 
5056; Pigeaud 1924: 294ff.] lists kings of Matarām—‘Panara-
ban’ [r. 784–803] and ‘Lokaphalā’ [sic; r. 855–885] among 
them—that it assigns to the Dvapara Age, which was marked 
in Java by the arrival of the Liṅgapurāṇa. The interpretive 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   170 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 179] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water171
cursory description of the temple 
and central cellas
Before commencing the explication of the Pramba -
nan temple, it will be useful to provide the reader 
with a brief overview of the temple, especially 
describing the statuary found in the sanctuaries, 
not all of which is present in the restored modern 
shrines. Apart from the statuary I discuss, there 
are many now-vacant niches, especially in the 
superstructure of the Śiva temples as well as the 
shrines on the periphery of the courtyard, and 
entirely vacant temples—the paired candi apit 
shrines on the north and south extremes of the 
central courtyard—whose original contents will 
complexity arises because of the intimate association of the 
Liṅgapurāṇa  with the Pāśupatas, whose figurehead Lakulīśa 
was replaced both as leader of the Pañcakuśikas as well as 
an avatāra body of Śiva by the figure of Pātañjala, himself 
unattested in the body of Indian Śaiva literature that has 
come to scholarly attention: see Acri 2014.)
 Whereas Acri and Jordaan came at the subject via gener -
alized considerations of Brahmā’s and Viṣṇu’s rank among 
the generalized āvaraṇa emanations of Śiva, such texts as 
the Liṅgapurāṇa directly support the concept that Viṣṇu 
and Brahmā are among the three principles of Śiva, the 
fundamental triguṇa consubstantiality of which provides the 
justification for their unprecedented placement on Pramba -
nan’s three yonis. Such direct statements are easy to find in 
the Liṅgapurāṇa—for example, 12.12 (Shastri 1951: 69): ‘O 
Viṣṇu, I am lord Śiva, the unsullied; I divided myself into 
three forms under the names of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Rudra 
with the activities of creation, protection, and dissolution’. 
Even the relative locations of the Prambanan statuary find 
justification in Liṅgapurāṇa 19.2–3 (‘The Enlightenment of 
Viṣṇu’; Shastri 1951: 68): ‘Both of you very powerful were 
born of me formerly. Brahmā, the grandfather of the uni-
verse was born from my right side; Viṣṇu, the soul of the 
universe, sprang from my left side. I am extremely pleased 
with both of you.’ With the praṇāla of the yoni pointing 
north, this compels the placement of Brahmā to the south 
and Viṣṇu to the north, in contrast to the principles that 
dictated the opposite disposition at prominent temples in 
South India.
 I conclude that Brahmā and Viṣṇu appear directly as 
tattvas of Śiva, with the identification sewn in as two of 
the āvaraṇas, Guardians of Time and Space, and again 
via the functional homologies between the Agastya of the 
southern cella and the Brahmā temple to its south, and the 
Mahiṣāsuramardinī of the northern cella and the Viṣṇu 
temple standing to its north, with Śaiva ṛṣi figures serving 
as a pervasive homogenizer of the ensemble.never be known but whose presumed execution in 
metal rather than stone speaks to their importance. 
In addition, there are hundreds of personalities 
engraved onto stone panels as bas reliefs. Despite 
the disappearance of much of the secondary stat -
uary, the principal statuary of the large shrines on 
the elevated central courtyard was fashioned from 
stone and survived in  situ until the modern period, 
permitting a substantial explication of many major 
elements of the temple.
Many of the principal stone statues of the Pram -
banan complex are still encountered in the restored 
temples of the central courtyard. Missing from 
the present restoration are the subsidiary statuary 
recovered from the Brahmā and Viṣṇu temples, 
the one metre-high statue of Śiva—the second one 
in the complex—from ‘Candi B’, and a long-for-
gotten Brahmā on a courtyard pedestal block (see 
the point marked ‘G’ on the map in Fig. 9.2), dis-
tinguished from the equivalently-sized Brahmā 
mounted on the yoni in the southern shrine. This 
courtyard Brahmā assumes diagnostic significance, 
providing both the essential verification of the 
presence of a liṅgodbhava (‘Arising of the Liṅga’) 
within the temple, and also demonstrating the true 
relationship of the Śiva icon in the central temple 
to the subsidiary Brahmā and Viṣṇu.
uniqueness of prambanan’s  
presentation of the  
three mahādeva s
While the decision to depict the standing statue 
of Śiva rather than a conventional liṅga  or mukha-  
liṅga on a yoni  is unique in the Indic world of its 
day, the depictions of Brahmā and Viṣṇu upon 
a yoni  are otherwise unattested. While the ide -
ation of an anthropomorphic liṅga ( vyaktaliṅga ) 
is mooted in some Śaiva sources (Mills 2019: 49), 
the actual implementation of an anthropomor -
phic manifestation of a deity upon a yoni , so far 
as the author can determine, is original to the 
Javanese, and they should be credited with this 
novel creation. However, as will be discussed below, 
there are rough parallels and precedents for such 
a conceptualization as the illuminating Pallava 
and Cōḻa figures of Śiva’s liṅgodbhava  episode 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   171 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 180] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg172
make clear, where Śiva transitionally manifests 
himself in anthropomorphic form within his own 
liṅga or a ‘column of lustre’ (Gillet 2010: 173–186). 
Prambanan is not only exceptional in hosting such 
a configuration, but very forward in making these 
symbolical elements so important.
This said, the idea of an anthropomorphic 
Śiva on a yoni, although implemented in the one-
time-largest Śaiva sanctuary of the Śaiva world and 
again in a now-disappeared enclosure to the north 
of the Ratu Boko plateau that was remembered by 
locals in the early 19th century as the remains of an 
ancient city or a kraton,3 was not very influential. 
3. The British Resident in Yogyakarta, John Crawfurd, was 
the first to document three statues of particular importance 
in the Gatak village that stood in a then-visible enclosure 
between Prambanan and the Ratu Boko escarpment. One 
was a statue of Śiva and the other two were statues of Viṣṇu, 
all constructed to fit to three vacant yonis nearby (Crawfurd We probably find echoes of it in the triple yoni at 
the newly-uncovered Liangan temple on the slopes 
of the Sindoro volcano, along one of the approach -
es to Dieng.4 Apart from that, there are two other 
known expressions of this core conceptualization, 
348–349; one of the Viṣṇus and the associated yoni were 
chosen for depiction as an ensemble in Crawfurd 1820b). As 
of 2003 the yonis still existed in the village of Gatak (Degroot 
2008: 239), and the author is indebted to Peter Sharrock 
for noticing the mutilated statue of the Viṣṇu depicted by 
Crawfurd in the custody of the Archaeological Service au-
thorities in Yogyakarta.
 The size of the square enclosure—900 feet per side—sug -
gested to Crawfurd that the structure was indeed a kraton. 
This is an observation of far-reaching consequence, and the 
present author and his collaborator Peter Jordaan will take 
up the issue in a future study.
4. See Degroot 2017 for a review and synopsis of several 
recent publications on the Liangan temple by the Indonesian 
Archaeological Service.Figs. 9.3a, 9.3b: Two conceptual echoes of Java’s iconographic novelty. Left (a): A Khmer image of Śiva standing 
on a yoni. Image courtesy of Emma Bunker. Right (b): A Sukhothai-period image of the same, executed in wood 
and now standing in the National Museum in Bangkok. Image courtesy of Abira Bhattacharya.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   172 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 181] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water173
one from Cambodia and one from Sukhothai, with 
both being from many centuries after Prambanan.5 
Prambanan’s iconographical innovation seems to 
have gone extinct with the cataclysm that beset 
the Central Javanese civilization in 929 CE, with 
the later Khmer and Thai examples perhaps inde-
pendent re-inventions.
Whatever might be learned from the particu-
lars of the implementation of the pedestals sur -
mounted by deities, it must be emphasized that 
the point of the central temple and the principal 
pair of subsidiary temples is the production of 
sanctified water by its passage over a holy object, 
actively prosecuted by a presiding royal priest, or 
perhaps even the Javanese king. The remainder of 
this chapter will be devoted to the water-related 
themes of lustration, sanctification, inundation, 
and Śaiva cosmogony.
prior work by jordaan on the  
retention of sanctified water at 
the prambanan temple site
Readers acquainted with post-Independence 
scholarship on Central Java will no doubt know 
of the perceptive and novel observations of Jordaan 
(1989, 1991, 1995, 1996a: 45–60, 2011) on a funda -
mental aspect of the Prambanan temple: multiple, 
self-consistent indications of the temple’s elaborate 
hydraulic engineering that suggested to him that 
the inner courtyard was intentionally flooded so 
as to serve as a gigantic tīrtha , a massive reposi -
tory of sacralized water. Jordaan came to supply  
5.  I am indebted to Abira Bhattacharya and Emma Bunker 
for pointing out the two later instances from Cambodia and 
Thailand illustrated in Figs. 9.3a and 9.3b. Bhattacharya (per-
sonal communication) observes that ‘it seems quite difficult 
to find any specific reference in the context of Prambanan. 
Similar kinds of anthropomorphic forms of Śiva standing 
on yoni-pīṭha are seen in Thailand, Vietnam, and Cambodia; 
however, this concept is obscure in Indian art. In Indian 
sculpture, the liṅga is often shown carved with the human 
face of Śiva which is installed on the yoni-pīṭha. Even one of 
the earliest images of Śiva, which is carved on a liṅga from 
the 1st century BCE, found at Gudimallam, shows the deity 
standing on Apasmāra’.an impressive amount of evidence and technical argumentation that I will briefly revisit in order 
that the reader might see the thematic support for 
such a flooding.
The Conceptual and Symbolic Functions of the 
Flooded Prambanan Courtyard as laid out by 
Jordaan
As per Jordaan’s own recounting of the stimulus for 
his inspired envisioning of an ancient but forgotten 
reality, the prominence of the literary theme of the 
Ocean of Milk—the primordial ocean churned by 
the gods and demons for the creation of the amṛta 
elixir, with Mount Mandara as the churning pole 
and a snake as the rope—was crucial for his recog-
nition.6 The Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa (8.42–59) de-
scribes the central ‘Crystal Palace’ temple complex 
of the kingdom of Laṅkā, and this literary account 
seems inspired by certain features of Prambanan.7 
6. Roy Jordaan (personal communication) wrote: ‘The 
thing that set my mind going was the oddity (see In Praise 
of Prambanan , Jordaan 1996a: 52–53) of seeing laborers, 
who were working in a corner of the central courtyard, 
pumping water out of the courtyard with a hose instead of 
having the water drain into the soil as one would expect on 
the basis of Krom’s remarks about the permeability of the 
soil in the central courtyard. At the same time, I remem -
bered reports about occasional drainage problems there. 
Back home, in Jakarta, when reading over de Casparis’ 
discussion of the Śivagṛha inscription (D28 in the National 
Museum), particularly the section dealing with notions of 
the tamvak  (tambak , a wall) and the tīrtha , I had the flash 
of inspiration in which all these elements were connected 
but quite differently from the way de Casparis had handled 
the inscriptional evidence. In retrospect, it would have been 
enough and much better to discuss directly the myth of 
the Churning of the Milky Ocean as the plan on which the 
structure was built rather than taking the roundabout way 
of the ritual deposits, the inherent complexities of which 
I was not aware of at the time.’ 
7. While I agree with Jordaan (1995: 48–56) of the perti-
nence to Prambanan of the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa’s de-
scription of the ‘Crystal Temple’ surrounded by the āvaraṇa  
shrines, I am struck by the fact that the text discloses to its 
readers (or audience) no details of the upper level of the 
temple, including the interiors of any of the shrines populat -
ing the courtyards, much less revealing that the ambulation 
corridors themselves contain—recursively—the Rāmāyaṇa  
story. What the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa conveys is largely 
that which the worshipper who was restricted from entry 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   173 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 182] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg174
Specifically, the text compares its ‘Crystal Palace’ 
temple to Mount Mandara with these suggestive 
phrases: ‘The crystal palace was comparable to 
Mount Mandara, the [temple] square to the Ocean 
of Milk’ (Poerbatjaraka 1932: 162, translated in 
Jordaan 1996a: 48–49). With these words, the Old 
Javanese Rāmāyaṇa not only explicitly allows that 
into the central courtyard could see. It is as though the 
composers of the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa carefully avoided 
revealing the cultic contents and conveying the profound 
theosophical doctrines of the Prambanan temple to the 
audience, retaining it as an esoteric secret to the commoners.
 The one divine personality that a temple visitor could 
observe from standing at a courtyard gate would be the 
Brahmā of the courtyard. In this regard, keeping in view 
Richard Davis’ 1988 work on the Śaivization of the cremation 
ritual and the role of the four lower mouths of Sadāśiva 
enunciating the Vedas and other inferior revelations, the 
Brahmā of the courtyard might be perceived as doing just 
that during the Vedic chanting during holy processional 
days.Fig. 9.4: Viṣṇu floating on the Ocean of Milk, the introductory relief of the Rāmāyaṇa story on the central Śiva 
shrine at Prambanan. Per Jordaan’s understanding, the devotee who comes to worship at the Śiva temple will 
have just waded through a courtyard inundated with sanctified water, representing precisely this Ocean of Milk 
theme. While ostensibly the first element of a Vaiṣṇava story that is incidentally presented on a temple of Śiva, in 
a Śaiva context, this Samudramanthana represents the moment just after Śiva’s renewed creation of the universe, 
and depicts the origination of Viṣṇu and Brahmā. (Cf. Figs. 9.15 and 9.19 below, several of the nineteen such 
depictions of Viṣṇu Ananteśa taken from the Kbal Spean near the Phnom Kulen-fed headwaters of the Siem Reap 
river). Also conspicuous in the scene is the serpent Ananta/Śeṣa upon which Viṣṇu floated, who in South Indian 
mythology would himself be reborn as Patañjali, a critical supporter of Śiva’s cosmic tāṇḍava dance, and also 
the cluster of five Śaiva ṛṣis, who, I suggest, are connected to Patañjali. Photo reproduced (with enhancements) 
from Vogel 1921.
the courtyard of a Javanese temple could be flooded 
but specifies at least one of the significances of the 
flooded courtyard. (The same text’s supplemental 
statement that the temples in the courtyard are 
Mount Mandara, the churning pole, will be further 
discussed on p. 199). In this regard, Jordaan noted 
the significance of the first panel of the Prambanan 
Rāmāyaṇa reliefs (Fig. 9.4), which commences the 
telling with a cosmogenic depiction of Viṣṇu sitting 
on the cosmic serpent Ananta,8 who in turn reposes 
on the primordial Ocean of Milk. 
8. This serpent is variously named Śeṣa (‘Remainder’, so 
called because he is the only thing that remains after the 
cataclysm that concludes each world epoch) or Ananta 
(‘Endless’, so called because he is the only thing that persists, 
unrestricted by time). In a future publication I will discuss 
this serpent and his reincarnation as another significantly 
consequential Śaiva nāga, Patañjali, with this birth being 
under Śiva’s imprimatur to a husband-and-wife pair of 
Śaiva ascetics.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   174 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 183] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water175
Fig. 9.5: The appropriateness of an inundated courtyard for the complexes’ Rāmāyaṇa story reliefs: the final relief 
on the central Śiva shrine at Prambanan depicts the Laṅkāvatāraṇa (the crossing of Rāma and Hanuman’s army to 
Laṅkā) before the presentation transitions to the Brahmā temple. Photo courtesy of the Leiden University Library.
This idea, Jordaan (1996a: 54) points out, is 
sustained by the term chosen in the Old Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa  for the structure enclosing a temple—
tamvak —that de Casparis wanted to translate as a 
normal brick or stone wall, ignoring the fact that 
even today tambak  are perceived as a wall that 
either serves to keep water off/out or holding/re -
taining water, being commonly used for man-made 
fish-ponds, formed by embankments or dikes.
The second of the themes that would be enabled 
by an inundated Prambanan courtyard is the ver-
isimilitude lent to key transitions in the panels 
of the Rāmāyaṇa selected for depiction on the 
Prambanan balustrades. In the scene depicting 
the crossing from Bhārata to Laṅkā by Hanuman’s 
army, the watery hiatus between the crossing scene 
executed on the Śiva temple and the subsequent 
Laṅkā portions on the Brahmā temple cleverly rep -
licates the demarcation as the tale transitions from 
the Śiva temple to its next stage on the Brahmā 
temple to its south.
This use of the physical water of the courtyard 
as a divisor in the Rāmāyaṇa  depiction continues 
to be a valid idea even when we take into account 
one of the more recent interpretative advances, 
Levin’s (2011: 161–167) convincing argument that 
the Rāma story most likely terminates not on the 
Brahmā temple but over on the first panel of the 
Viṣṇu temple with the reunion of Rāma and Sītā, 
where they are joined by their two sons Lava and 
Kuśa. Jordaan (2011: 190) pointed out that the 
flooded courtyard symbolically functions as the 
Netherworld out of which Sītā ascends in order to be reunited with Rāma and her two sons, and 
summarized: 
Apparently, the central courtyard of Pramba -
nan was not conceived as a neutral space, but 
served a dual function in the sculptural layout 
of the Rāma story over the three main shrines, 
as a means to separate and re-connect the sto -
ry at two critical junctures, and as a symbolic 
marker of the Netherworld which, thought of 
as being located in the sea, was physically rep -
resented as a pool (cf. Levin 2011: 166n29).
Jordaan (2011: 190–191, 191n8) later advanced a 
newer argument that touches the present chapter’s 
interest in manifestations of Śiva’s cosmological 
activity. Jordaan wrote: 
I would like to draw attention to the reliefs on 
the exterior of the Śiva temple, particularly to 
the dancing ‘celestial damsels’ ( vidyādharī, ap -
saras es) and heavenly musicians ( gandharva s) 
depicted on the outer side of the balustrade. 
These reliefs have usually been examined in 
the context of choreographic studies as depict -
ing particular dance movements as laid down 
in the Nāṭyaśāstra , an Indian treatise dealing 
with dance and music, but little significance 
has so far been accorded to the fact that ap -
sarase s are intimately connected with water. 
Apsaras es, their name being popularly derived 
from the word waters ( āp, apas ), appear during 
the Churning of the Milky Ocean. I now ven -
ture to suggest that some of the unidentified 
divinities on the subsidiary temples represent 
the deities who appear during the Churning 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   175 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 184] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg176
of the Milky Ocean, such as Dhanvantari and 
Lakṣmī.
The elements adduced by Jordaan to support 
his flooding thesis include textual references to the 
existence of a tīrtha that cannot be fulfilled by any 
tank structure known from within its well-explored 
grounds. Assuming that both the Old Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa  and the Śivagṛha inscription refer to the 
Prambanan temple,9 Jordaan noted that the final 
facet enabled by a flooded Prambanan courtyard 
is its transformation into a tīrtha, ‘function[ing] as 
a pool (tank) or a reservoir for the holy water that 
priests made in a special ritual’ (Jordaan 1995: 37). 
Indeed, Jordaan (1996a: 54–55) himself seems to 
ultimately affirm the courtyard-as- tīrtha  concept as 
the paramount goal of the temple, noting ‘I believe 
that now, instead of “re-enactment”, I would prefer 
Mircea Eliade’s (1976: 18–31) term “cosmicization”, 
denoting a consecration which reproduces the par -
adigmatic work of the gods.’ 
Physical Clues suggesting the Intentional 
Accumulation of Water in the Prambanan 
Courtyard
In support of his observation of the multifaceted 
utility of a flooded Prambanan courtyard, Jordaan 
mustered a wide array of technical evidence that 
persuades one that the flooded courtyard was a 
physical reality. To begin with, Jordaan pointed out 
that the entire elevated courtyard was fashioned to 
function as an enclosed basin, with even the steps 
at the courtyard gates being elevated. As Jordaan 
(1995: 57n41) noted, the depth of flooding at Pram -
banan was hard-stopped by the height—55 cm—of 
the threshold gates, and supplemented this fact by 
9. While I have no objection to scholarship which discerns 
a relationship between the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa and the 
Prambanan temple, I strongly oppose the acceptance—in-
creasingly wide—of the Śivagṛha inscription as a founda -
tion stone of Prambanan: this unremembered find should 
have been the most unforgettable of finds if it were indeed 
found at Prambanan and then sent to the new museum in 
Batavia. I should add that upon personal investigation into 
the validity of de Casparis’ transcription (1956: 305–310), I 
have found numerous errors. I will not rely upon the text 
until a validated version is at hand.observing that the temple was devoid of decoration 
and embellishment below this level, as would be 
expected if that portion of the wall were indeed 
submerged.10 The provision of the thick retaining 
wall also suggests that they were designed for the 
retention of water: the wall was some two metres 
thick, and its foot was positioned 1.8 metres below 
the level of the raised central courtyard.11 Part of 
this doubtlessly was provided in order to retain the 
massive core of the courtyard, which was elevated 
some 4.2 metres above the surrounding second 
courtyard—about the height of the Śiva statue 
when standing on its yoni —but the portion above 
the courtyard floor would have served to direct 
gravitational forces downward, and also to resist 
water pressure from within.
Jordaan’s thesis compelled attention to the 
particulars of the engineering of the courtyard, 
which featured negligible channelling, with poor 
natural drainage on the elevated courtyard. While 
Krom (1923: 451) acknowledged the fact that only 
eight small drain spouts serviced the entirety of the 
central courtyard, he ascribed the small number 
to the allegedly porous nature of the sandy soil 
in the courtyard. Jordaan (1996a: 51) in response 
observed that this implied subsidence should have 
been of great concern to the builders and the mas-
10. Peter Jordaan (personal communication) has pointed 
out that similar elevation characterizes the gateways into the 
central Śiva shrine and posits that the temple promenade 
itself could be flooded through the expedient of stopping 
up the makara drain spouts.
11. Although perhaps, given their poor understanding of 
the relevant mechanics, this engineering precaution was 
considered necessary, as the entire central courtyard was 
an elaborately engineered platform raised to a height of 4.2 
metres above the second courtyard below. The thickness of 
the courtyard wall is substantial, some 2 metres thick, with 
a foot some 1.8 metres below the level of the raised central 
courtyard.
 The thickness of the wall demonstrates that it was built 
to withstand some expected hydrostatic pressure without 
budging. This may have been prophylactic given the antic-
ipated stresses of the massive temples planned for erection 
in the central courtyard, and this design decision perhaps 
was motivated by the experiences during the construction 
of Borobudur, which suffered a partial collapse during the 
construction that needed to be shored up with the massive 
retaining belt that now obscures the originally visible Kar-
mavibhaṅga panels at the base.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   176 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 185] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water177
sively heavy temples that they created. Based on the 
stratigraphic surveys of the Nandi temple, which 
consists of layers of sand, clay, gravel, and large 
and smaller riverstones, it was concluded that the 
original substrate is not easily permeable to water, 
and this effect was compounded by the inevitable 
compaction of the top layer by the construction 
activity.12 Citing a personal communication with 
Dr Willem Hoogmoed, Jordaan (1995: 37, cf. 1996a: 
52n30) noted that ‘the top layer [of the soil] must 
have been so degraded since the beginning of the 
building activities that a so-called “slaking” or  
12. Stratigraphic profiles of the courtyard very near to the 
central Śiva shrine are described in Ari Setyastuti 2011 and 
Daud Aris Tanudirjo 2011.“sealing” came into being through which water 
could hardly move at all.’ The present sealing 
surface was not an effect of a millennium’s com -
paction but rather was an effect originally present 
in the temple, seemingly by design: the substrate 
was elaborately engineered by the Javanese of the 
9th century to have precisely the qualities that 
are seen today.
The drainage mechanisms provided for this 
elaborately engineered courtyard are worth the 
reader’s attention, for if the courtyard did not 
permit the percolation of rainwater, the eight mi-
nuscule drain spouts do not facilitate the removal 
of water through that means either (see Figs. 9.8a, 
9.8b).13 
Obvious Remedies addressing the Courtyard 
Flooding were neglected: Prambanan’s 
Inundation was Intentional
An abundance of evidence suggests the inundation 
of the Prambanan courtyard, and, as Jordaan has 
pointed out, the physical flooding seems integral 
to the symbolic significance of the temple.
One of the principal objections to Jordaan’s 
thesis has been the lack of an obvious mechanism 
for achieving the inundation. Indeed, identifying 
the means of efficiently introducing water into the 
artificially elevated Prambanan courtyard consti-
tuted one of that author’s frustrations. Over the 
course of time, the author had mooted a number 
of mechanisms to raise water against gravity into 
the courtyard. While Śaiva tīrthas were known in 
Central Java and their remains recovered (Degroot 
2008), tīrthas in the area being generally lodged 
near the local water level and fed from springs, 
no osmosis effect was available at a courtyard that 
had been artificially raised above the surrounding  
13. Peter Jordaan, in a personal communication, noted 
that ‘from the other side (i.e., the perspective of the second 
courtyard), the two small drainage holes are clearly visible. 
Today they used cement to keep the stones of the upper 
stairs together; perhaps the top stones in the middle could 
be removed to drain the courtyard faster in those days. The 
small holes can easily become blocked by leaves or flowers. 
The gutter on both sides of the lower stairs could be modern.’Fig. 9.6: A photo depicting the height to which the inner 
courtyard was raised. The geotectonic judgement of 
the sthāpaka was greatly trusted, as any slippage as at 
Borobudur some three or four decades earlier would 
be catastrophic for the design. Photo courtesy of Roy 
Jordaan.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   177 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 186] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg178
Fig. 9.7: Partial uncovering of the system of underground walls, fashioned from riverstones, in the central temple 
area of Prambanan. These would have resisted lateral shifting of the bulk fine material. Photo OD 11401, courtesy 
of the Leiden University Library.
Figs. 9.8a, 9.8b: Left (a): Annotated depictions of two of 
the eight drain spouts that permit the central courtyard 
to be drained into the second courtyard of Prambanan. 
Photo courtesy of Roy Jordaan with amplifications by 
Peter Jordaan. Top (b): One of the twelve makara drain 
spouts that permits the egress of the rainwater that falls 
upon the Śiva temple to be drained into the courtyard. 
The relative clearance ratios of the temple versus the 
courtyard drain spouts are substantial—perhaps 30 times 
for the central Śiva temple alone. Photo courtesy of Peter 
Sharrock.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   178 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 187] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water179
ground.14 No channel is seen to conduct water 
into the courtyard. Jordaan (1995: 37) concluded 
his survey of possible mechanisms by noting a 
manmade feature in the secondary Prambanan 
courtyard: an underground stone water conduit, 
presumably being fed from the nearby Opak 
river (Kali Opak) and being sufficiently close 
to the temple to facilitate manual filling of the 
courtyard (see the map in Fig. 9.2a). Without this 
sinuous conduit feature having been fully traced 
to either its northern or southern extremities, I 
note that it stands on the tiered second courtyard, 
where a filling would be difficult because it would  
be countergravitational, but that the elevation  
might facilitate the removal of water from the 
Prambanan temple.
Not least, of the arguments working in Jor -
daan’s favour is the brutal fact, so nettlesome for 
the modern operation of Candi Prambanan as a 
heritage tourism site for visitors who do not like 
wet feet and ruined shoes, that before the extensive 
hydrological improvements, Prambanan’s inner 
courtyard was quite naturally flooded. (In fact, as 
Jordaan [2011: 187n3] notes, so urgent was the need 
to clear water from the temple before the Novem-
ber 1994 visit of former First Lady Hillary Clinton 
that ‘the distinguished guest and her retinue could 
only gain access after the water had been pumped 
out by fire-brigade personnel who were called in 
from the city of Yogyakarta’). The extensive engi-
neering remediation executed by the Indonesian 
archaeological authorities in the past two decades 
(Dinas Purbakala Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta 
1993; Jordaan 1995: 37, 2011: 187n3) included the 
digging of more than twenty interconnected 
drainage pits in reinforced concrete as well as the creation of gravel-filled conduits around each of 
14. Degroot (2008: 65) notes of the Central Javanese tīrthas 
that ‘From the technological point of view, the bathing 
places of Central Java are rather simple. They are built in 
areas where underground water is abundant and found 
(almost) at ground level. The water, originating from a 
spring or the underground part of a river, filters upwards 
through a floor made of river stones, and fills the pool. There 
is no evidence for a connection with an irrigation system. 
The fact that the pools were fed by underground water—and 
not surface water—certainly helped in maintaining their 
water level whatever the debit of the nearby rivers.’ the temples, visible in the background of Fig. 9.22c. 
Given the flooding created by rainfall itself, Jordaan 
did not need to identify another external source 
in order to validate his thesis. 
The question is whether the fact of abysmal 
drainage at the Prambanan courtyard represents 
a never-corrected design flaw or an intentional 
feature of the original architecture. The evidence 
strongly suggests that the courtyard’s tendency 
to flood during rainfall was a deliberate decision, 
as concluded by Jordaan (1996a: 18) himself: ‘In 
a number of recent publications I have tried to 
demonstrate that the poor drainage of the central 
temple area is not due to a possible error in the 
construction by the original builders, but seems 
rather to form part of their original plan, involving 
the construction of an artificial tank or pond.’ 
As noted above, there are only eight miniscule 
drain spouts for the entirety of the central court-
yard, which is an intuitively inadequate number for 
such a large area. If unwanted drainage problems 
existed, as the modern experience at the temple 
strongly suggests, the most obvious remedy is 
again intuitive: increase the number of drain 
spouts or enlarge the existing ones.15 That no such 
obvious remedy was ever implemented indicates 
that nothing about the original construction was 
found to yield an objectionable result. This in turn 
implies that the retention of the water, which must 
have been present in some degree in the courtyard 
even with conscientiously cleared drain spouts, was 
never considered a design flaw.
Given that Prambanan’s central courtyard 
flooded naturally in the heyday of the temple and 
continued to do so until the elaborate modern 
efforts to make the temple amenable to tourists, 
it is virtually undeniable that the courtyard func-
tioned as a tank that retained water. Flooding is 
what happens when it rains, with no mechanism 
other than natural rainfall required.
15. The reader will note from the example in Fig. 9.8b that 
many more large makara  drain spouts—at least twelve on 
the Śiva temple alone, each with diameter of about 10 cm—
were furnished for each of the circumambulation corridors 
of each of the courtyard’s temples, as though water was 
normally unwanted on the circumambulation corridors 
but was permitted to accumulate in the courtyard.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   179 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 188] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg180
I will now expand on Jordaan’s foundational 
thesis and direct it into new and expanded ex -
pressions, employing both new data and new 
considerations so as to allow us to discern the op-
erational principles that underlay the creation of 
the Prambanan temple. The present chapter is but 
a preliminary and quite limited subset of the thesis 
I intend to lay out. When fully finished, I hope 
that this account inspired by Jordaan—it would 
not exist had he not shared his envisioning—will 
constitute the rudiments of a proper appreciation 
of the remarkable conceptual formulations under -
taken by the Javanese in their astonishing kingdom, 
where their craft at Prambanan stood near the apex 
of their religious accomplishments.
water as an architectural element 
was known to the indic kingdoms 
outside the javanese realm
To commence a further analysis of Prambanan 
as a tīrtha , it should be pointed out that water 
was incorporated into Pallava creations as an 
architectural element— jalavāstu— almost two 
centuries before Prambanan, and there are quite 
strong reasons to believe that the Central Javanese 
were cognizant of them. As Monius (2001: 104) 
noted, the South Indian Buddhist Maṇimekalai  
explicitly included Java (the island of ‘Cāvakam’) 
and Laṅkā as part of a recognized cultural domain. 
This close cultural linkage between Java and South 
India is further attested by the Javanese choice of 
script, which closely followed the Southern Indian 
form as late as the time of Sañjaya in 732 (Sarkar 
1969); and—this is pertinent to Prambanan—their 
acceptance of the liṅga-pīṭhikā representation 
(Dhaky 2004). As noted by Dhaky, such Pallava 
embellishments found little purchase outside 
Narasiṃhavarman II’s Kailāsanātha temple, other 
than the widespread adoption in Central Java.16
16. Dhaky’s admirable effort may have ignored another 
kingdom that was closely connected to both South India 
and Java, for what appears to be a liṅga-pīṭhikā is found in 
the photographs around Mahendraparvata (Phnom Kulen) 
presented in the photographs of Boulbet and Dagens (1973: 
90, Photo 19); these may be further revised with the renewed Even after the Pallavas began to stumble in the 
succession struggles that began in 728, the Java -
nese Śaivas likely accepted the Pallava works as 
paradigms for sophisticated temple architecture, 
for they were not only the first of the types of in-
dependent free-standing temples created by the 
Javanese, but the Pallava temples such as Kailāsanā-
tha were also the largest and most theosophically 
evolved such temples at the time of the Javanese 
creations of Canggal or Prambanan. At the time 
when Sañjaya created his Śaiva temple to Śambhu  
archaeological attention being paid to the vast Phnom Kulen 
site. Fig. 9.9: The 732 CE inscription left by King Sañjaya at 
Candi Canggal on the Wukir hillock, some few miles to 
the east of Candi Borobudur. Shortly after its execution, 
the misfortunes of the Pallava may have stimulated a 
willingness in Java and elsewhere to experiment with 
new modes of design and decoration, though adhering 
to the general pattern fashioned during the period of 
the Pallava heyday. Photo: author
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   180 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 189] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water181
at Canggal, these free-standing temples would be 
novelties. As Sarma (1999: 546) wrote: 
The first [Pallava] attempt at a structural 
temple [as opposed to one cut into a natural 
rock] in Toṇḍaimaṇḍalam, as the present ev -
idence goes, was the narapati  Siṃhapallava 
Viṣṇugṛhaṃ caused by Narasiṃhavarman I 
(630–668) which was a house ( śayyagṛha ) for an 
extant recumbent god described mahācakrin  
in the midst of the ocean ( jalanidhau ) and 
built of stones ( aśmābhiḥ ). The image, a cut-out 
icon out of an exposed rock boulder touching 
the waves ‘is a very unconventional figure of 
reclining Viṣṇu without Ananta Bhūdevī, and 
āyudha s’. There are also more sculptured boul -
ders near the Shore Temple.
Other temples of the Pallavas also incorporated 
water as an element, and an entire temple complex 
is called Jalaśayana (‘Lying in Water’). This idea 
sustained the placement of Rājasiṃha’s Shore 
Temple at Mahābalipuram (Māmallapuram), with 
its connotations of the Descent of the Ganges. Re -
garding this temple, Kaimal (2013: 143) observed 
that ‘Yet another scenario is of ceaseless ocean 
tides and periodic tsunamis slowly grinding the 
cluster of shrines commonly referred to as the 
Shore Temple down to soft lumps, and this [was] 
perhaps a planned outcome of placing icons on 
the shore line where nature could perform the 
daily ritual lustrations that honoured the divine 
(Smith 1996).’
Another site of pertinence is the c. 770 Vaikuṇṭa 
Perumāḻ temple of Nandivarman II, the court -
yard of which seemingly served as a replica of the 
Ocean of Milk (Hudson 2008: 7). This temple is 
instructive for the situation at Prambanan for many 
reasons, and will be discussed in several places in 
this chapter. A fuller accounting of the employment 
of water in the Pallava and other Indian temples 
subsequent to the time of Prambanan is beyond 
the scope of this chapter.17
17. I am indebted to Corinna Wessels-Mevissen for 
drawing my attention to a publication by Dagens (2005: 
185), mentioning that the space around the vimāna of the 
12th-century Airāvateśvara temple, Darasuram, Tamil Nadu, 
was filled with water, since a very low wall leads around 
it. Gerd Mevissen (2002: 62) observes that the platform The practice of intentionally flooding the 
courtyard enclosure of a sacred location is estab-
lished beyond all doubt by reference to instances 
dating from both prior to and subsequent to the 
erection of the Prambanan temple. The precedent 
derives from corroboratory passages in two Sri 
Lankan chronicles. From the late mediaeval Sin-
halese chronicle Rājaratnākaraya (Karunaratne 
2008: 33; cf. the much less precise description in 
Mahāvaṃsa XXXIV.45, which specifies that the 
water came from the Abhaya tank, now known 
as the Basawak-kulama) comes an account of an 
early inundation of the courtyard of Anurādhapu -
ra’s Ruwanweli stūpa, which involved using some 
mechanism—the precise nature is left unstated18—
to spray the dāgäba with honey water, fragrant 
water, mercury water, and red ochre water for one 
week each, resulting in a courtyard that was filled 
calf-deep with this water when properly stoppered 
up. The courtyard was then inundated with ghee 
that had been stored in Lanka’s treasury, with the 
entire subsequent ceremony continuing for a week 
before, presumably, the courtyard was drained.
I do not know whether the Rājaratnākaraya  
description accurately conveyed the details of the 
actual practice during the reign of Bhātika Abhaya 
(r. 19 BCE–9 CE) some 900 years before Pramba-
nan and described in the Mahāvaṃsa from some 
500 years before, nor is any description of the 
symbolic significance the month-long inundation 
ceremony provided in the Rājaratnākaraya and 
(adhiṣṭhāṇa) at the Nṛtta Sabhā at Chidambaram is simi-
larly recessed and ‘forms a shallow basin that at times was 
probably filled with water thus giving the impression that 
the whole structure was flooded.’ Mevissen (2002: 69n5) 
further notes that such shallow basins are found on the 
rathamaṇḍapas at Palaiyarai, Darasuram, Kumbhakhonam 
(at both the Sarangpani and Nāgeśvara temples), as well as 
Chidambaram (see also Mevissen [1996: 500]). As Liesbeth 
Pankaja Bennink has pointed out to me, the modern wor-
shippers at the Airāvateśvara complain about the flooding of 
their temple, which forces them to walk through a courtyard 
flooded calf-deep during the rainy season. Of course, from 
the perspective of Prambanan, such a flooding is entirely 
intended.
18. I thank Peter Jordaan for pointing out the possibility 
that an Archimedean screw or else a pumped bladder was 
the tool used to achieve the Ruwanweli inundation.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   181 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 190] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg182
Mahāvaṃsa other than it was a form of jalapūjā ,19 
but the Sinhalese account is significant in that it 
attests the ceremonial flooding of a courtyard that 
was equipped with a drainage system that could 
be stoppered up. What might be significant is the 
reported depth—calf-deep, perhaps 20 or 30 cen-
timetrescm—of the Ruwanweli inundation, which 
generally accords with the 10 cm depth proposed 
by Jordaan (1995: 55, 57) based upon multiple con-
siderations in the Prambanan temple courtyard 
(Jordaan 1995: 51–60).
19. It should be pointed out that the Sinhalese, although 
Buddhists, were quite conscious of the Vaiṣṇava account 
of the cosmic founding. T.B. Karunaratne (1990) discusses 
the Buddhist employment of the Anavatapta myth, listing 
deep homologies between the systems.The second piece of new information comes 
from a very recent archaeological discovery from 
Jombang in East Java, and is provisionally thought 
to derive from the 11th century reign of King Air-
laṅga.20 The site features a temple in a constrained 
courtyard, with stone water channels leading from 
a nearby spring to feed water into the courtyard.
Rather unfortunately, these pieces of informa-
tion, which I believe are the single best substan -
tiations of Roy Jordaan’s vision of an inundated 
Prambanan courtyard, only came to my attention 
after that gentleman’s passing in late March 2019. 
Lest the reader use the Lankan information about 
a mechanism or device to achieve the spraying of 
the Ruwanweli stūpa to look for a similar device 
20. I am indebted to Peter Sharrock for noticing this and 
bringing it to my attention.Fig. 9.10: The Ruwanweli stūpa of the Mahāvihāra in Anurādhapura, the courtyard of which, per the Rājaratnā-
karaya, was subject to periodic ritual flooding to the depth of a man’s calf. Photo courtesy of Osmund Bopearachchi.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   182 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 191] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water183
at Prambanan, in what follows I will lay out some 
novel considerations that should, I believe, make 
the mechanism of Prambanan’s flooding clear.
sanctification of water was known 
to and practised by the  
indicized javanese
In the preceding section, I examined a few of the 
instances where foreign kingdoms that were well 
known—and seemingly deeply influential—to 
the Javanese furnished imaginative precedents 
for architectonic jalavāstu , incorporating bodies 
of water in their sacred architecture. I now wish 
to examine the somewhat parallel concept of 
consecration through contact with sanctified 
objects, requiring no sacerdotal manipulation in 
order to accomplish the generation of holy water. 
This process involves actual sacralized water, as 
opposed to a clever use of real water as a mere 
architectural feature. As I will argue below (p. 201), 
this process was a principal effect instituted at the 
Prambanan temple. Precedents or analogues for 
this process, some of which predate the period of 
Pallava stone temple construction, were available 
to the conceptualizers of the Prambanan temple, 
either as Javanese adoptions of Indian ideations or 
ideas original to the Javanese themselves. Perhaps the oldest of these conceptual prece-
dents is to be found not in Central Java but to its 
west, in an inscription crafted in prior centuries by 
King Pūrṇavarman in his Tārumānagara kingdom 
near modern Bogor in West Java: the Vaiṣṇava Ci 
Aruteun inscription (Guy 2014: 11–12; see also the 
transcription given by Sarkar 1971: 3–5), incised on 
a boulder in the Aruteun riverbed. The inscription, 
engraved in a South India-derived script, was in-
tended to be submerged in the intermittent flows through the riverbed and explicitly declares itself 
to sanctify the waters by doing so (Figs. 9.11a, 9.11b).
The inscribed boulders of the Tārumānagara 
kingdom may provide not just a remote concep-
tual precedent for a consecration-by-contact at 
Prambanan, but a rather direct precedent for two 
noteworthy Śaiva artifacts of the 9th century, like -
wise immersed in a flowing river, this time the 
Opak River which courses to the southern sea and 
passes by the west side of the Prambanan com -
pound. Two stone Śaiva yantra tablets (BG 748, 
BG 1521), with a circular, nine-compartmented 
diagram displaying tridents, lotus petals and lotus 
flowers, have been recovered about a kilometre 
downstream from Prambanan, within sight of the 
present bridge on the Yogyakarta-Solo Road. Rita 
Margaretha Setianingsih (1998: 18) notes that these 
symbols are reminiscent of the attributes of the 
digbandhas/navasaṅas, while Acri and Jordaan 
Figs. 9.11a, 9.11b: Left (a): Flowing water as consecration: the Vaiṣṇava boulder inscription from the Ci Aruteun 
riverbed, a relic of the Tārumānagara kingdom in West Java. Photo OD-6889, courtesy of the Leiden University 
Library. Right (b): The site of the inscription (now removed) when the river is flowing after a rainstorm. Photo 
courtesy of Emmanuel Francis.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   183 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 192] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg184
(2012: 290) note the likely conceptual association 
of the lotuses and attributes of deities on the 
Opak tablets with directional guardians depict -
ed high on the superstructure of the central Śiva 
shrine at Prambanan. Further clarification of the 
purpose of one of the stones—the BG 748 artifact  
(Fig. 9.12a)—might be gained through both a 
careful study of the inscription that runs cir -
cumferentially around the central fields, and also 
through study of a similar device found at the 
Kbal Spean riverine site in Cambodia, which is 
flanked by at least one yantra inscription on a 
riverine boulder (Fig. 9.12b). If my appraisal of 
where the Prambanan water accumulation was 
vented is correct, these two yantra tablets—it is 
highly likely that there are more to be recovered—
may have served as supplemental consecration for 
the Opak River.21
21. Although positioned on a boulder adjacent to the 
spring-source that fed into the Kali Bolong and not in the 
stream itself, the Sanskrit boulder inscription at Tuk Mas Yet another attestation of consecration-  
through-contact that was operative in the Matarām 
kingdom within a few decades and within a few 
kilometres of the construction of Prambanan is 
found at the catchment tank for water that passes 
under ‘triple miniature candi ’ tank at the southern 
Ratu Boko promontory. This tank was established 
c. 857 by a royal Śaiva supporter—Śrī Kumbha-  
yoni22—in his activities adjacent to the historic 
padhānaghara of the Sinhalese Abhayagirivāsins 
on the southern quadrangle of the Ratu Boko site. 
(‘Golden Spring’, located near the village of Lebak to the 
northeast of Magelang; cf. Sarkar 1971: 13–14) proclaims 
the spring to be ‘as purifying as the Gaṅgā’. The boulder is 
embellished with a multitude (16 or maybe more) of holy 
symbols, including padmas and radially segmented circles 
that are highly reminiscent of the Opak yantra stones.
22. As I proposed elsewhere (Sundberg 2011: 152n19; 2016: 
363n23), Śrī Kumbhayoni was likely the former king of Galuh 
in Sunda, related to the Matarām regent King Kayuvaṅi 
(r. 855–885) via King Varak’s (r. 803–827) splitting of the 
kingdom.Figs. 9.12a, 9.12b: Left (a): BG 748, one of the two engraved bījākṣara stones recovered from the Kali Opak, about 
a kilometre south of the Prambanan temple. An inscription, yet undeciphered or even adequately imaged, runs 
circumferentially in the band surrounding the inner grid. Photo courtesy of Swati Chemburkar. Right (b): A 
similar yantra figure engraved on a riverside boulder at the Kbal Spean site in Cambodia. Photo courtesy of Swati 
Chemburkar.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   184 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 193] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water185
Fig. 9.13: The Śaiva ‘holy water machine’ of the Ratu Boko, mere metres from the Abhayagirin double-platform 
padhānaghara there. The tank into which the water flows has been dedicated to Śiva by a gold consecration foil. 
The three consecration temples are almost assuredly the work of the learned Śaiva nobleman Śrī Kumbhayoni 
and date from around 857 CE. Compare the three temples depicted in the boulder reliefs at the Kbal Spean site in 
Cambodia, and the three principal temples at Candi Prambanan, as well as the basin incised into the riverbed at 
the Kbal Spean site (Fig. 9.20 below). Photograph: author.
Fig. 9.14: The origination point of the channels that pass underneath the central of the Ratu Boko temple simulacra. 
Water, still profane, was somehow introduced into these channels to emerge as sanctified. Photo: author.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   185 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 194] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg186
Apart from whatever sanctification accrued to 
water fed under the three small shrines, the tank 
itself was consecrated to Śiva in the form of Rudra, 
as is evident from the gold foil recovered during 
its reconstruction (Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan 
Purbakala Yogyakarta 2007: 125).
If the Ratu Boko tank is a tīrtha, it is the smallest 
of the ones created in Central Java. Prambanan, if 
its central courtyard indeed functioned as a tīrtha, 
would be the largest. Elevated as both the Ratu 
Boko and Prambanan sites were, they are unique 
in lacking passive hydraulic pressure to fill them; 
some alternate means of feeding them must be 
found. In the case of the Ratu Boko triplet of em-
bryonic temples, the source was ultimately manual: 
the hierophant needed to bring water to the sluices 
under the temple.
These alternative Javanese implementations 
of religious structures dedicated to consecra -
tion-by-contact are pertinent for Prambanan, but 
there is no obvious avenue for water into Pramba-
nan. However, with no further intervention, rain 
from above floods the courtyard and would often 
be adequate to convey the desired impression 
as envisioned by Jordaan. Natural rainfall is the 
medium of inundation that I discern, and thanks 
to the particulars of a Śaiva riverine consecration 
device in mid-11th century Cambodia, I think 
that I can both identify the source of the water 
to be sanctified and unveil the mechanism of its 
sanctification, insights that ultimately point to the 
governing principle of the Prambanan temple. It is 
to that Kbal Spean site that we next turn.
the kbal spean śaiva 
gaṅgāvatāraṇa-sahasraliṅga 
sanctification site: the mass 
consecration of water in a 
commensurately indicized kingdom
Cambodia’s Kbal Spean riparian site on the Stung 
Kbal Spean (‘Head Bridge Creek’), situated on the 
slopes of Phnom Kulen mountain that fed the 
ancient capital of Angkor from some 25 miles to 
the north,23 validates the concept of the conse -
23. This was the site of the historic Mahendraparvata 
(‘Great Indra’s Mountain’) and centre of Khmer governance cration of a vast flow of water. This site, spread 
along a 200-metre stretch of the river culminat -
ing in a cluster of waterfalls, offers many features 
of pertinence to understanding the Prambanan 
temple established along the Kali Opak. The Kbal 
Spean site inscriptions, some dated from the spe -
cific years 1054 and 1059 and incised on boulders 
along the way, specify that the Kbal Spean is a 
in the early 8th century, the extent of which is only now 
being appreciated through the technique of LiDAR (Light 
Detection And Ranging) surveying.Fig. 9.15: Yet another instance of the consecration of 
flowing water: liṅgas, nominally a thousand of them, 
carved into the Stung Kbal Spean riverbed, some 25 
kilometres to the north of Angkor. From the mid-11th 
century, produced under the direction of the Śaiva king 
Sūryavarman I (r. 1006–1050) and his son Udayādit -
yavarman II (r. 1050–1066). Note that the array of Kbal 
Spean liṅgas within a yoni suggests the Śaiva flower 
motifs on the temples at Prambanan, engraved as the motif on the thighs of the statue of Śiva Mahādeva at 
Prambanan, and on the stone tablet of the Kali Opak. Photo courtesy of Hunter Watson.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   186 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 195] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water187
Fig. 9.16: The waterfall at the terminus of the Kbal Spean riverine site. Under the overhang are engraved some of 
the Sanskrit epigraphical messages that signal some understanding of what the site represents. At Prambanan, the 
waterfall is executed in permanent stone. Photo courtesy of Hunter Watson.
Fig. 9.17: Panorama of the scene depicted at the head of the sanctifying array of submarine liṅgas at Kbal Spean. 
The site is richly and multifariously redolent of themes central to Candi Prambanan, but perhaps represents just 
the beginnings of the pertinent art historical revelations from Phnom Kulen’s newly-unveiled Mahendraparvata 
site, whose religious architecture was contemporaneous to Prambanan. Photo courtesy of Hunter Watson.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   187 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 196] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg188
sahasraliṅga  (1,000 liṅga ) site dedicated to a Gaṅgā -
vatāraṇa : a site of a thousand śivaliṅga s, sanctify -
ing the Descent of the Ganges. The large number 
of submerged liṅga s incised into the Stung Kbal 
Spean riverbed collectively serves as the conse -
crating mechanism intended to sanctify the water 
that linked the cosmic mountain of Kulen to the 
temples of Angkor. The site is worth describing 
in some detail: as I will lay out on p. 191, the Kbal 
Spean is one of the conceptual keys to Prambanan, 
opening deep retrospective insight into prominent 
features of the Prambanan temple, with the liṅga s 
occurring in clusters of arrays. Although the site 
has been subject to prior dedicated publications 
(Boulbet and Dagens 1973; Boulbet 1974; Jacques 
1999; Tawa 2001; Bunker and Latchford 2004, 2011; 
Sokrithy et al. 2004),24 I will tailor my discussion 
to the task of explicating Prambanan.
Although the site epigraphy remains to be com -
prehensively transcribed, translated, and explicat-
ed, the inscriptions specify the Kbal Spean to be a  
sahasraliṅga system at least twice, once in Sanskrit 
verse and once in Khmer (Jacques 1999: 359), and a 
cursory examination of the arrays of liṅgas incised 
into the riverbed leave little doubt as to the verac-
ity of the claim (Figs. 9.15–9.20). On the overhang  
of the waterfall was written yet more Sanskrit poetry, 
with one verse (K. 1012, no. 1; Jacques 1999: 361) 
affirming the identity of river and Gaṅgā, reading 
Torrent of Rudra ([ ru]dradhārā ), river of Śiva 
(śivārnāsā ), this Gaṅgā manifests itself visibly, 
noisily, that which completely destroys the 
faults of the world ([ lo]kakilbiṣasaṃhartrī ), 
like the celestial river ( dyunadī ; ‘heavenly 
river’, i.e. the Gangā).
The Spean, now sanctified after passage over the sa -
hasraliṅga s and its plunge over the waterfall ledge, 
terminated in an immense tīrtha  a number of miles 
downstream, whence this water was routed to a 
number of temples in the vicinity.
The reader should appreciate the form assigned 
to these liṅgas, which were generally ringed at the 
24. Apart from the literature cited, I am indebted to Emma 
Bunker, Swati Chemburkar, Peter Sharrock, and Hunter 
Watson for more detailed briefings on the site and its sculp -
tural themes. apex when depicted in profile on the riverbed (Fig. 
9.18), but could assume a spiky aspect when depict -
ed in bas relief on the boulders along the river. The 
pertinence of this feature will be made apparent 
in the next section, where I will note the finials on 
what seems to be a corresponding sahasraliṅga  
implementation at Prambanan.
These liṅgas did not always stand alone; the 
riverbed is frequently embellished with incised 
bas-relief yonis, many hosting a plurality of liṅgas 
that together assume the shape of a lotus, remi -
niscent of the more three-dimensional metallic 
depiction from Cambodia of a slightly later age.
As Peter Sharrock pointed out, Khmer imple-
mentations of sahasraliṅga sites occur not only on 
Phnom Kbal Spean but also at the healing water 
spa of Neak Pean (Anluang Phkay) in Angkor itself, 
which was later converted to a Buddhist site under 
the great King Jayavarman VII. In this vein, I am 
further indebted to Hunter Watson for pointing 
out the existence of another ‘1,000 liṅga’ site in 
the Indian motherland, this one dating from the 
18th century and fashioned at Sirsi Taluk, Uttara 
Kannada, Karnataka.25
25. In a helpful inquisition into the textual support for the 
sahasraliṅga  concept, an anonymous reviewer of this chapter Fig. 9.18: The profile of Kbal Spean’s liṅgas shows them 
to be isoforms of the decorative bell turrets at Pramba-
nan. The creation of a 1,000 liṅga array at Prambanan 
was duplicated at the Kbal Spean, which is explicitly 
labelled a sahasraliṅga array in a contemporaneous site 
inscription. Photo courtesy of Hunter Watson.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   188 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 197] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water189
Figs. 9.19a, 9.19b: Left (a): One of the Kbal Spean’s nineteen bas-relief depictions of Viṣṇu reclining on the serpent 
Ananta, floating on the Ocean of Milk that he has just churned. Brahmā in turn issues from a lotus from his 
navel. This is precisely the subject of the opening register in the Rāmāyaṇa reliefs that wrap around Prambanan’s 
Candi Śiva and continue through its Candi Brahmā to its Candi Viṣṇu. This particular instance is flanked by a 
triplet of temples, with a liṅga and yoni depicted in the central one. Photo courtesy of Olivier Cunin. Right (b): 
An equivalent view taken when the waters are running. Note the splashy context of this Ocean depiction. Photo 
courtesy of Swati Chemburkar.
Fig. 9.20: A submerged basin excavated in the Kbal Spean riverbed. On its sides are engraved not one but two of the 
numerous instances of the Anantaśāyin episodes accompanying the Kbal Spean sahasraliṅga depictions. This basin 
finds corollaries in Central Javanese tīrthas and at the Ratu Boko (Fig. 9.13). Photo courtesy of Swati Chemburkar.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   189 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 198] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg190
The Kbal Spean site shows every indication 
of dating from the late-10th to mid-11th century, 
produced principally under the direction of 
King Sūryavarman I (r. 1006–1050) and his 
son Udayādityavarman II (r. 1050–1066), with 
Udayādityavarman completing his father’s 1000-
liṅga project upon his death (Bunker 2011: 228). 
The liṅgas are attributed to a minister and were 
carved by hermits. Interestingly, the first royal 
date was 986 in the Śaka system (= 1064 CE), and 
986 was the actual number of the sahasraliṅgas 
that were engraved on the riverbed (Jacques 1999: 
359). (Jacques [1999: 359] thought that one of the 
inscriptions [K. 1011/3] contains the number 900 
that might reference a date, 978 CE, that corre -
sponds to the first occupation of the site by Śaiva 
hermits, though he concluded that all four major 
groupings of the site’s inscriptions appear to have 
been engraved under the reign of Udayādityavar-
man II [Jacques 1999: 357]). It is unlikely that the 
Kbal Spean site was unknown in contemporaneous 
South India as Rājendra Cōḻa rendered assistance 
to Sūryavarman (Lippe 1971: 30); whether this is 
related to Rājendra’s attack on Śrīvijaya, where 
he sacked the capital and took the Śailendra king 
into captivity, remains unknown.
There is indeed reason to believe that Śaiva ṛṣis 
participated in the development of the Kbal Spean 
site, as depictions of them are found in a number of 
locations, the site seemingly being their dominion. 
Further knowledge about the site might be gained 
through an analysis of the specific traits of these 
figures, along the lines of the pathbreaking iden-
tifications furthered by Chemburkar and Kapoor 
(2018) and Kapoor (2019).
The reader should note that there are many 
features that stand as ancillary or adjunct to the 
sahasraliṅgas-Gaṅgāvatāraṇa river consecration 
offered some additional information on the Sirsi Taluk site, 
pointing out that the site, located on the Shalmala River, 
appears only to have been explicated by oral traditions, not 
texts. To take an example drawn from the website https://
www.inditales.com/sahasralinga-sirsi-thousand-shivalingas  
(last accessed April 2022): ‘The king of Sonda or Swadi 
Akasappa Nayaka has no children. He was advised by a 
priest to make 1008 Shivalingas to be blessed with children. 
So, the king had every stone at the bed of Shalmala River 
converted into a Shivalinga.’mechanism, and these are of deep interest for any 
full explication of Prambanan. Not the least of 
these are the numerous replicated depictions of 
the Anantaśāyin episode—19 distinct tableaux of 
Viṣṇu reclining on Ananta in the Cosmic Ocean 
with Brahmā lodged on a lotus stalk (Fig. 9.19). Al -
though the Sanskrit inscriptions at the overhang of 
the waterfall seem to deal with the trimūrti of Śiva, 
Viṣṇu and Brahmā (vrahmaviṣṇvīśvara; Jacques 
1999: 362), within the dominant Śaiva context, these 
Anantaśāyin depictions clearly denote not a Viṣṇu 
cult but rather the Śiva’s recurrent cosmocratic 
regeneration of the entirety of the universe, begin -
ning each cycle afresh with the primary generations 
of the two subordinate mahādeva s. There are other 
features of note, among which are the depiction 
of the cluster of three independent temples, each 
of which seems to shelter a liṅga (Boulbet and 
Dagens 1973: 11). In a separate depiction stands 
a now-unrecognizable figure poised in a tāṇḍava  
dance (Sokrithy et al. 2004: 44–46).26 Clustered 
with this depiction and flanking it are two other 
temples, each of which harbours a liṅga, with one 
of the temples having a great number of liṅga-like 
objects covering its roof. In light of the arguments 
to be advanced in the next section, this is not im-
possible to interpret as a sahasraliṅga temple of the 
type that I believe is found at Prambanan, where 
the pairing of liṅga and dance constitute antipodal 
modes of Śiva’s tattva  (‘principle’ or ‘reality’). Thus, 
despite the predominance of the flowing water 
being progressively sanctified by passage over the 
sahasraliṅgas of the site, we see clear efforts to 
depict that which is both static as well as that which 
is cosmogenic.
Solid liṅga- and tāṇḍava-related items enclosed 
within temples are not the only features to be en-
graved on boulders along the rivers. A basin—one 
presumes it to constitute a tīrtha—was excised in 
the riverbed, and the sidewalls of this submerged 
basin are furnished with not one but two of the 
Anantaśāyin Ocean of Milk representations.
26. Sokrithy et al. (2004: 45) describe this figure as a hermit 
sitting cross-legged in meditation in a small cell, but clearly 
this figure has assumed a stance used conventionally to 
denote dance, both in Śaiva as well as Esoteric Buddhist 
contexts. For a dancing Hevajra, see Sharrock 2009.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   190 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 199] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water191
If the Opak river was consecrated by the two 
circular symbolic devices of the yantra tablets 
discussed above, the Kbal Spean site also partook 
of this Śaiva symbological imperative, for it too 
features a similar circle divided into nine compart -
ments, with sacred glyphs within (Fig. 9.12a above). 
The Kbal Spean sacred circle, located in the vicinity 
of the waterfall, is accompanied by an inscription 
of four lines (Sokrithy et al. 2004: 28) that I do not 
believe has yet surfaced in the epigraphic literature, 
but that certainly will aid in better understanding 
of the Opak phenomenon.
Also at the site but positioned on the riverbank 
is an independent statue of Brahmā, a feature whose 
significance might be made clear only through 
examination of the Śaiva liṅgodbhava myths. This 
Brahmā might not be wholly unconnected to the 
now missing royally sponsored ‘gold liṅga’ (su -
varṇaliṅga) of the site. Per the epigraphic record 
there was at least one suvarṇaliṅga at the Kbal 
Spean site: Jacques (1999: 361) reads the Sanskrit 
inscription as referring to ‘a liṅga  of gold installed 
on the summit of the mountain, ornament of the 
three worlds’. While Boulbet and Dagens (1973: 
13) thought that they had identified the possible 
location for it in a now empty yoni within the river, 
Jacques (1999: 361) thought that the royal liṅga of 
gold was perhaps hosted on the riverbank, and 
that there was an edifice ‘of light materials’ erected 
not far from the first cluster of texts (Jacques 1999: 
358). Such a riverbank temple with an independent 
Brahmā would accord closely with what was ac -
complished at Prambanan with its large statue of 
Brahmā positioned on an independent pedestal in 
the courtyard (at Position G in Fig. 9.2b).
In the section that follows, I will greatly rely 
upon the themes—Gaṅgāvatāraṇa and sahasra-  
liṅga most prominent among them—composited 
in the 11th-century Kbal Spean site in order to ex-
plicate the Prambanan temple, for it required the 
stimulus of these overtly identified Kbal Spean 
instances before I could see the analogous imple-
mentations at Prambanan.27 That said, I do not 
27. The reader should be aware that there are a few features 
of the Kbal Spean site that do not find correspondences at 
Prambanan, some of which in fact are still quite mysterious. 
A sculpted three-dimensional frog with teeth stands out in 
my mind.think that the process of illumination is entirely 
one-directional: if Prambanan is back-illuminated 
by the Kbal Spean site, the Kbal Spean site could 
benefit from forward illumination from under -
standings developed at Prambanan. In fact, one 
of the issues that should be closely investigated is 
whether the Kbal Spean is a remote derivative of 
Prambanan, which likely implemented the Gaṅgā -
vatāraṇa and sahasraliṅga themes as boldly and 
conspicuously as anywhere in the Indic world. In 
contemplating the Kbal Spean as a derivative of 
Prambanan, we must ask whether there is any other 
precedent for the Spean’s ‘spiky’ liṅgas and the 
three central towers occupied by liṅgas. Can we 
conversely learn about Prambanan by observing 
what themes and motifs—the Bull, the isolated 
Brahmā, and the ‘orants’ (chanting supplicants) 
in particular—were selected for inclusion at Kbal 
Spean despite not having any particularly logical 
connection to the flow of the river, as with the 
multiple panels devoted to Viṣṇu on the Ocean of 
Milk? Before such progress through comparison 
can be made, thoroughly updated studies of both 
Prambanan and the Kbal Spean must be under -
taken. 
the central prambanan temples 
explicated as a gaṅgāvatāraṇa   
and sahasraliṅga  sanctification 
site in light of the ratu boko  
and kbal spean evidence 
Regarding yet another of the features that were 
seemingly particular to Prambanan, namely the 
roughly one thousand idiosyncratic and distinctive 
fluted finials that abound on the eight substan -
tial structures of its central courtyard, Véronique 
Degroot (2013: 66) noted: 
the bulbous finials that adorn all the temples 
of the central courtyard are unique to Pramba -
nan. In Java, Hindu temples are usually topped 
by square finials, while Buddhist ones are 
crowned by stupas (bell-shaped monuments). 
The ribbed bulbs of Prambanan probably 
helped fuel the confusion of the first Western 
visitors, who often described the temple com -
plex as a Buddhist monument. 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   191 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 200] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg192
The peculiarity of the profiles of the sahasraliṅ -
gas at the Kbal Spean Gaṅgāvatāraṇa riverine 
site—recall that the sahasraliṅga label is explicit, 
unequivocal, and confirmed by a count, while if 
it could not be guessed from the Śaiva Ocean of 
Milk imagery in proximity to its waterfall, the Kbal 
Spean site epigraphy explicitly identifies the river 
as the Gaṅgā—opens up a recognition of the cor-
respondingly curious spike-tipped, ribbed bulbous 
finials that abound on the balustrades and super-
structures from 200 years earlier at Prambanan 
(Figs. 9.21 and 9.22), the elaborated symbolic form 
of which impeded prior successful identification. 
These, I believe, are liṅgas—the core object is seen 
quite clearly in the instances positioned around the 
crowded tops of the temples, and there were almost 
certainly a thousand of them. Dutch researcher 
Peter Jordaan, with the help of Swati Chemburkar, 
has achieved a confirmed tally—a verified count 
on numbered photographs—that presently totals 
995 liṅgas at Prambanan.28
The flutings on the Prambanan finials clearly 
depict srota-streams and represent the Descent of 
the Ganges—the reader will notice the upturn or 
upsplash of the fluting at the lower terminus, very 
certainly indicative that the Descent of the Ganges 
is the motif embodied in the ribbing. The lithic 
Ganges—there must be upward of 10,000 of these 
individual streams among the thousand bulbous 
finials—functions to not only illustrate the signifi-
cance of the monsoon rainwater passing over them, 
but also to render that flow permanent, serving as 
a lithic embodiment of the activity of the sahas -
raliṅgas to sanctify water that perpetually flows 
over them even in the absence of rain, in much the 
manner that the ‘kāla-heads’ are disgorging and 
consuming the phenomenal world in perpetuity or 
that the temple makaras are continuously spouting 
jewels. The reader will observe that the depiction 
of this Gaṅgāvatāra-srota symbolism was essential 
even for the finials crowded into position at the 
28. For comparison, there are not exactly 1,000 liṅgas 
depicted at Kbal Spean, but rather a number which denotes 
the Śaka year (986) of the site’s creation (Jacques 1999: 359). 
No such chronometric effect could be possible at Prambanan, 
which probably dated from around 780 Śaka: as mentioned, 
the labourious but not yet exhaustive count has turned up 
at least 995 fluted finials. very top of each of the individual shrines’ central 
spires, where the true underlying profile of the  
sahasraliṅgas (rather than the sahasrasrotas) is 
seen most distinctly: on these topmost structures 
space permitted the engraving of only minute 
indications of the Gangetic riverine flutings (Fig. 
9.22b) but still important enough to depict.
It is doubtlessly significant that all of the Gaṅgā -
vatāraṇa-liṅga s are established on the eight princi -
pal buildings within the central courtyard, with no 
identifiable liṅgas to be found on the 224 shrines in 
the peripheral courtyard or on the thick gated wall 
that demarcates the inner courtyard: the rainwater 
that passes over these Śaiva emblems is entirely 
constrained to the central courtyard floor.
The Gaṅgā descends from Mount Kailash, 
and the waterfall is an essential element in the 
accounts of Śaiva cosmology and theology avail -
able in a number of the primary texts extant at 
the time.29 Per Śaiva mythology, the force of the 
fall is broken up by Śiva’s hair.30 The Prambanan 
Gaṅgāvatāraṇa- liṅgas incorporate this waterfall 
in their terminal upsplash, while similar waterfall 
splashes are created by the makara drain spouts 
that spew forth the Ganges onto the courtyard 
floor.31 Despite their different contexts and ori -
29. Adiceam (1976: 104; see also Gillet 2010: 247–272) notes 
that the association of Śiva and Gaṅgā is rather ambiguous 
in the texts and seems to manifest itself in three differ -
ent expressions: Gaṅgāvatāraṇamūrti or ‘he upon whom 
descends the Gaṅgā’; Gaṅgādhara or ‘he who carries the 
Gaṅgā’; and Gaṅgāvisarjana, or ‘he who allows the Gaṅgā 
to flow’. Apart from the Liṅgapurāṇa and the Śivapurāṇa, 
there are accounts of the Gaṅgāvatāraṇa in the Sanskrit 
Vāyupurāṇa, Matsyapurāṇa, and Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa, as well 
as multiple sources in Tamil Śaivism, so by itself Pramba-
nan’s Gaṅgāvatāraṇa motif possesses no strong diagnostic 
value for determining the sthalapurāṇa of the temple. 
30. The Tamil Śaiva saint Māṇikkavācakar (800–862–?), 
whose activity was likely contemporaneous to the erec -
tion of Prambanan, mentions one of Śiva’s salvific acts, the 
catching of the falling Ganges in his hair, and he provides 
a rationale for this act in a verse: ‘Had she [Ganga] not 
plunged / into His matted locks, / there would have been 
great destruction / and the whole world would have plunged 
/ into the nether regions.’ Māṇikkavācakar’s translator and 
commentator Glenn Yocum (1976: 24) notes, ‘Again, Śiva 
saves the cosmos from ruin, just as he saves his devotee 
from the ruin of rebirth and karma.’
31. Taking pura in its sense of ‘temple’ rather than ‘city’, 
Griffiths (2011: 148) advances the suggestion that the 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   192 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 201] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water193
Fig. 9.21: A view of the Prambanan temple, depicting the cascade of ribbed finials that occur on the superstructure 
and balustrades of the eight major shrines within the inner courtyard. Image courtesy of Peter Sharrock.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   193 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 202] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg194
Figs. 9.22a, 9.22b, 9.22c: Top left (a): The fluting on Prambanan’s thousand liṅga-finials lends a bulbous appearance 
to a lean base form. Numbering eight or sixteen ribbons, such fluting connotes the Descent of the Ganges or other 
symbolism related to the rainwater which poured down over the form. Photo: author. Top right (b): The finials 
as manifested at the apex of the primary Śiva temple. The reader will note that only the faintest indications of the 
fluting were created, but that the core resembles the liṅgas at the Kbal Spean and the caitya at the nearby Buddhist 
Candis Plaosan and Sojiwan (Fig. 9.23 below), and approximates the backpiece of the Śiva statue, several tens of 
metres directly below. Photo: Bernet Kempers 1955, as accented by Peter Jordaan. Bottom (c): The terminus of the 
water flow in the courtyard, with water spewed from the mouth of the makara. Photo courtesy of Roy Jordaan.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   194 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 203] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water195
entations—Prambanan’s distributed and circum-
ambulatory open-air presentation rather than the 
linear, riparian submarine context of the Kbal 
Spean, with the Prambanan water flow vertical 
rather than principally horizontal—the Prambanan 
and Kbal Spean objects are, in my opinion, most 
assuredly one and the same Gaṅgāvatāraṇa, with 
the waterfall breaking the Gaṅgā’s descent after it 
has passed over the liṅgas. Indeed, there is no way 
to prevent the rainfall from falling across these 
liṅgas: Java’s monsoon drenchings accomplish a 
mass lustration of them—no human mechanism 
is possible—off the superstructure liṅgas, with the 
consecrated water subsequently accumulating in 
the courtyard, passing either directly into it or else 
first being channelled through the makaras (see Fig. 
9.22c). Once seen for what it is, the design leaves 
an indelible impression.
At some point in the past millennium, the true 
identity of the sculptural depiction of these forms 
was forgotten by the local populace and baffled 
prior students of the temple. The bulky rotundity 
introduced by the Prambanan ribbing—a shroud 
that obscured their meaning (at least to the modern 
discoverers of the temples)—as well as the oddly 
spiky apexes, together with the admixture of these 
forms with more conventional temple finials—the 
kūṭa-shaped finials—are what kept the massive 
monolithic liṅgas from being detected by prior 
researchers of the temples.32 It was only the chance 
‘Laṅkāpura’ of one of the Kumbhayoni Ratu Boko inscrip-
tions was one name for the Prambanan temple, with its rich 
Laṅkāvatāraṇa imagery. (I remind the reader that the royal 
Śaiva exegete Śrī Kumbhayoni deposited Śaiva sacred ar -
chitecture and Śaiva Sanskrit and Old Javanese inscriptions 
on the Ratu Boko, on the northern Gunung Kidul ridgeline, 
and on the plain between Prambanan and the Ratu Boko 
in the years between 856 and 863.) Griffiths (2011: 148n46) 
further moots the possibility that Kumbhayoni’s ‘Bhadrālo -
ka’ temple is another name for Prambanan or else one of 
its components. In light of Griffiths’ argument, it is not 
implausible that Kumbhayoni’s reference to the nirjhara-
pura refers not to a city named ‘Waterfall’ but rather is yet 
another reference to the Śaiva waterfall streams associated 
with the now-recognized Gaṅgāvatāraṇa of Prambanan.
32. I defer detailed discussion of the spiky finials that I 
recognize as Gaṅgāvatāraṇa-liṅgas to a  future publication, 
where they will be identified as a conscious effort to mimic 
the caityas abounding on corresponding positions on the 
roofs of the Esoteric Buddhist temples—most particularly observation brought about by an effort to amplify 
the consecration-by-contact phenomenon that 
manifested the pertinence of the Kbal Spean sa-
hasraliṅga depiction to the author.33 However, the 
Candi Sojiwan and Candi Plaosan—elsewhere on the plain. 
(Although he neither explained nor argued his identification, 
Chihara [1996: 132] was seemingly the first to posit that the 
Prambanan finials were not just Buddhist ratnas or bells 
but stūpas, an interpretation that was promoted at the very 
beginning of Java Studies by John Crawfurd). The thousand 
liṅgas from which they protrude, I will argue in supplement 
to the considerations posed by Jordaan (1993) and Kim 
(2007: 158–177), constituted a challenge to the commensu-
rate, profusely replicated Buddhist symbolism found at the 
stūpa-studded Candi Sewu (Old Javanese sevu: ‘thousand’) 
and elsewhere among the Buddhist monuments of Java. 
After so many decades of Esoteric Buddhist predominance 
and the trio of elaborate state-sponsored expressions of that 
religiosity—Sewu, Borobudur, and Plaosan—the placement 
of a conspicuous sahasraliṅga array on the Prambanan 
superstructure was, I believe, the predominant symbolic 
imperative for Prambanan’s iconographic directors, as it 
was the first state Śaiva temple in nearly a century and a 
new hierarchy at the court had to be made visible to the 
populace. (As such, I will argue that the Prambanan temple 
supplemented the Śaiva resurgence manifested around 857 
in the vicinity of the Abhayagirin compound on the Ratu 
Boko prominence, as I argued in Sundberg 2016). The 
sahasraliṅga system with the appended Gaṅgāvatāraṇa 
symbology seemed to be a simply brilliant contrivance that 
perfectly answered requirements, taking the specific form 
of the tapering stūpas of the nearby Candis Plaosan and 
Sajiwan.
33. Consideration of the circumstances of the Kbal 
Spean suggest that this Khmer site was itself inspired by 
Prambanan’s own spike-tipped sahasraliṅga and the triple 
tower with liṅgas inside. While the present author steps 
backward in time and employs the epigraphically well-de-
scribed 11th-century Kbal Spean to explicate the 9th-century 
Prambanan, the true conceptual dependency was necessarily 
the reverse: the conceptualizations of Prambanan likely 
informed the Kbal Spean. Where, other than Prambanan, 
might the Kbal Spean carvers have gotten their liṅga model, 
as the spiked finials of which are a wholly unexpected feature 
of a liṅga? (As mentioned above, the author will point out in 
a future publication based on this chapter that these spiky 
liṅgas are a recasting of Buddhist caityas implemented in 
neighbouring Buddhist temples, particularly resembling 
those at Candi Sojiwan and the Plaosan complex. Whether 
this symbolic suppression of Buddhism was required by the 
instigators of the Kbal Spean sahasraliṅga site is unknown, 
but may merely have been a faithful embodiment of a sahas-
raliṅga expression first implemented at Prambanan). The 
Kbal Spean iconographic directors also implicated the Ocean 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   195 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 204] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg196
thousand liṅgas seem to have impressed themselves 
as the one folk memory of the temple complex, per -
sisting in the local legend of the demon challenged 
by Loro Jonggrang, the daughter of the Ratu Boko, 
of Milk episode—the motif is replicated some nineteen 
times along the 200-metre stretch of river—and therefore 
seemingly understood the true profile of the Prambanan 
liṅgas, not being confused by the Gaṅgāvatāraṇa-cladding 
over the liṅga core: they possessed interior knowledge of 
Prambanan and were not tricked into replicating this su -
perfluous aspect of the design. Given these considerations, 
it could be argued that the Śaiva Śailendra kings rather than 
the contemporaneously powerful Cōḻas were the ones to 
whom Sūryavarman I and Udayādityavarman looked when 
they needed a role model, and it can therefore be inferred 
that Prambanan was the preeminent expression of the sa-
hasraliṅga, which the Javanese Śaivas apparently did like 
nobody before. (It should be noted that one of the possible 
conclusions drawn from this observation is that Prambanan 
was not wholly defunct even at the time when governance 
had shifted to East Java in the wake of what seems to be a 
929 CE mahāpralaya deluge that visited upon the Central 
Javanese kingdom).to fashion a thousand statues overnight (Lokesh 
Chandra 1989; Jordaan 1993: 29–31). The quantity of 
1,000 is the one fact of salience to endure through 
the thousand and more years.
It is here, after much detailed argumentation, 
that a stock-taking may be considered appropriate. 
The takeaway that I stress to the reader is that one 
of the keys to understanding Prambanan is the 
rainwater that becomes sanctified by spilling over 
the liṅgas, an ultimate symbolic fulfillment of the 
consecration-by-contact ideation that was present 
elsewhere in theistic Java, both centuries before 
at Tārumānagara sites as well as at the time of 
Prambanan, where the phenomenon is also found 
in both the Kali Opak and Ratu Boko sanctifica -
tion sites. Primarily, though, the consecration that 
occurs via the passive mechanism of the temple’s 
exterior liṅgas mirrors the consecration of water 
actively obtained from the statues standing on the 
yonis in the garbhagṛhas below.Fig. 9.23: The stūpa-studded superstructure of one of the royal Buddhist shrines at Candi Plaosan, the signature 
product of King Garuṅ (r. 829–847) a generation or more from the earliest plausible date of the founding of 
Prambanan. A king critical to Java’s subsequent religious history, the raka of Pikatan (r. 847–855) began his public 
career (c. 835) as a sponsor of two prominent shrines at his predecessor Garuṅ’s Candi Plaosan complex, but came 
to be memorialized in his Śivagṛha mortuary inscription as a Śaiva. Photo courtesy of Roy Jordaan.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   196 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 205] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water197
the gaṅgāvatāra and the  
śaiva ocean of milk: the 
intersection of two aquatic myths 
in prambanan’s courtyard
The reader has by now undoubtedly seen that 
while only part of the rainwater courses down 
over the temples’ liṅgas, all of it terminates in 
the courtyard. The flow thus becomes an accu -
mulation while that which was initially dynamic 
becomes static, analogous to the manner that  
Śiva manifests himself as the dynamism of the 
cosmic dance and the stasis of the liṅga.34 In both 
modes, though, the sacrality is retained, no matter 
what the form.
It should be observed that at Prambanan, the 
two aquatic themes of Gaṅgā and Milk-Ocean are 
conjoined by the serpentine makaras, which are the 
mechanism of transformation in this fundamental 
process. The important makara theme and its royal 
associations—seemingly particular to the Śailendra 
dynasty—will be examined in the fuller publication 
of my research on Prambanan. 
The author thinks that the identification of the 
liṅga-consecrated rainfall as the source for the 
Prambanan courtyard seems assured: the only 
water flowing over these liṅga-turrets, half of which 
are located so perilously high on the temples that 
they are entirely inaccessible to humans, would be 
rainfall, and this is the only avenue of ingress for 
the sacralization of water for the tīrtha. As noted 
above, such mechanisms as chute, osmotic pressure 
from an underground spring, and bucket brigade 
have been mooted, but it is clear that the deluge of 
the superstructure of liṅgas is what did the trick. A 
further implication of this is that the Prambanan 
courtyard functions as not just a taṭāka—a large 
reservoir—but a fully sanctified tīrtha: its thou -
sandfold passage across the liṅgas sanctified it, a 
further illustration of the principle of consecration 
by contact. With more than 200 cm of annual rain -
fall in Yogyakarta, the heavens indeed provide a 
profuse quantity of rainfall than can accumulate in 
34. The reader is directed to skillfully-expressed passag -
es on the complementary relationship between liṅga and 
tāṇḍava at the Chidambaram temple in Handelman and 
Shulman (2004: 33–44, 79–87).the Prambanan temple courtyard.35 This solves the 
troubling mystery of water in the courtyard, and 
in fact enhances the understanding of its nature, 
which had until now relied on the Old Javanese 
Rāmāyaṇa identification of it as an Ocean as well 
as what could be inferred by the hydrological ref-
erences adduced, with great perspicacity, by Roy 
Jordaan. This sanctified courtyard is yet another 
Javanese conceptual innovation, although one 
strongly motivated by South Indian precedents of 
standing bodies or pools of water forming jalavāstu, 
or water architecture.
How long the rainwater stood in the courtyard 
is unclear as the author is aware of no evaporation 
studies, but it is clear from observation of the rain-
fed basins on the southeastern Ratu Boko terrace 
that such water can persist for quite some time, and 
I can point to at least one possible Śaiva temple 
ritual justified by the desiccation of the Ocean: a 
concept in the Liṅgapurāṇa (29.29–32) where the 
Ocean dries up and needs to be recharged by the 
propitiation of Śiva’s liṅga.
At the moment, the author lacks the ability 
to point to passages in the available mediaeval 
Śaiva literature that precisely sets forth a myth -
ological nexus between the fluid Ganges and the 
static Ocean of Milk that the rainwater at Pram-
banan ultimately became: the Gaṅgā is an element 
within the phase of the Śaiva cosmic cycle while 
the Ocean is the period of hiatus where the de -
struction (saṃhāra) phases into emission (sṛṣṭi),36 
35. It is to Peter Jordaan that I also owe a second suggestion 
pertinent to ancient realties at Prambanan. Noting the height 
of the raised platforms where the four stairwells intersect 
the circumambulation promenade around the Śiva shrine, 
Peter Jordaan suggests that the curious topology effectively 
segmented the shrine promenade into four self-contained 
basins that could be easily inundated by the plugging up the 
makara spouts that drain it. Jordaan further suggests that 
this might represent the four oceans of Hindu mythology. 
36. In a comment on an early draft of this chapter, Andrea 
Acri aptly suggested that the Gaṅgā might be the sṛṣṭi and 
the Ocean would constitute sthiti. I would agree that such 
an assignment would be more logical and conceptually 
appropriate for the flow of rainfall at Prambanan, but know 
of no textual support for such a notion, as it seems from 
the Śaiva mythologies that the post-saṃhāra phase was 
the Ocean and that the Himalayas down which the Ganges 
flowed were subsequent creations. Acri’s point should be 
borne in mind in subsequent searches of the literature.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   197 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 206] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg198
with the Ocean made possible by the rainfall 
from the clouds formed out of the smoke of the 
burning of the world in the saṃhāra ( Liṅgapurāṇa  
54.32–40; Shastri 1951: 212–213). However, such 
texts as the Liṅgapurāṇa (77.53; Shastri 1951: 383) 
recognize tīrtha and Gaṅgā to be analogous quan-
tities—‘The wells, tanks, and lakes are śivatīrthas 
(sacred waters of Śiva). By taking a bath in those 
with devotion one is undoubtedly liberated from 
brahmin-slaughter and other sins’—just as with 
the Ganges. Although a formal statement of con-
substantiality has thus far eluded the author, pure 
common sense may alone suffice to suggest the 
missing connection.
Whatever the ultimate scriptural impetus for 
the Gaṅgāvatāraṇa–Ocean nexus, the association 
was recognized by sophisticated Śaivas at religious 
sites other than at Prambanan. While an exhaus-
tive survey awaits, the author can point to three 
sites—the Kbal Spean, the Chidambaram temple 
at Tillai, and the Aruṇācaleśvara temple at Tiru-
vāṇṇamalai—that bear phenomenological witness 
to the Gaṅgā–Ocean association.
At the Kbal Spean, which, if it could not be sur-
mised from its waterfalls, is a site that is explicitly 
self-described as a Gaṅgāvatāraṇa , the Ocean of 
Milk theme is so important that Śeṣaśāyin imagery 
is implemented no fewer than nineteen times, dis-
tributed along the 200-metre stretch of sahasra-  
liṅga s clustered along the tumultuous river. At the 
Kbal Spean site, the Ocean of Milk imagery occurs 
concurrently with the sanctification of the river 
via the sahasraliṅgas, and even physically occurs 
upstream of the Gaṅgāvatāraṇa that is presumably 
enacted by the waterfall. From the consecration 
site of the Kbal Spean, the flowing water is not 
arrested until it reached its final destination, a 
tank many kilometres downstream, but the site’s 
creators considered a tīrtha to be so integral to the 
river site that a little tīrtha was excavated from the 
riverbed rock—one imagines the trouble for the 
labourers—and provided with not one but two of 
the Śeṣaśāyin Ocean of Milk depictions (Fig. 9.19). 
(The Kbal Spean tīrtha is nowhere near as large as 
the Prambanan courtyard, but is quite commen-
surate in size with the little tank at the Ratu Boko 
platform, and the Kbal Spean’s bas-relief depictions of three liṅga -filled temples37 does not greatly differ 
than the miniature simulacra of temples found 
at the Ratu Boko).38 Water flows over this fully 
immersed tīrtha, as it does the riverbed yoni with 
multiple liṅgas. As seen in Figs. 9.17 and 9.19, two 
of the Anantaśāyin scenes where Viṣṇu engages 
in entranced yogic slumber upon a supposedly 
tranquil Ocean of Milk is anomalously set upon a 
rapid where the often-raging river splashes past. In 
short, there seems to be little concern on the part 
of contemporaneous Śaiva artists to differentiate 
between situations calling for still water and situ-
ations requiring a flow of water.
This indifference to distinctions between the 
flowing Gaṅgā and placid Ocean is seen at the 
Śaiva Chidambaram temple at Tillai—and also at 
the Aruṇācaleśvara temple at Tiruvāṇṇamalai—in 
South India, where the tanks are attested within 
the sanctified perimeter of a temple.39 One of these 
37. The now-abraded objects in the two flanking temples 
in Fig. 9.19 give the appearance of being liṅgas with a figure 
inside them, as though they were representations of a ca-
nonical Liṅgodbhava  as seen at the Kailāsanātha temple and 
elsewhere in South India.
38. There are obvious suggestions of a direct relationship 
between the three massive temples on the north-south axis 
at Prambanan and the three miniature representational 
temples that lay on the north-south axis at Kumbhayoni’s 
tīrtha site at Prambanan. At the Ratu Boko, the sacralization 
of water occurred via channels under the temples rather 
than over them, and this may either indicate some sort of 
homology or deep interconnectedness with Prambanan 
that I do not comprehend for want of understanding of the 
precise relationship between the two sites in the 9th century. 
Because the Ratu Boko instances are oriented to the west 
rather than the east as at Prambanan they either are actually 
analogous to the Prambanan triplet of ‘Candi A’, the Nandin 
shrine, and ‘Candi B’, or else they form counterparts to the 
three principal temples at Prambanan, serving as linkage 
between the sites. 
 If the Khmers of the mid-11th century knew of Pram-
banan, did they also know of the Ratu Boko and its basin, 
or indeed of the Prambanan courtyard as a basin?
39. Michell (2003: 64) notes that of Chidambaram’s ten 
tīrthas, two—the Śivagaṅgā and the Paramānanda Kupa, the 
‘Well of Supreme Bliss’—lie within the temple. Surrounding 
the temple is one called the Tirupparkkadal Tank, the ‘Tank 
of Divine Milk’. The nearby Indian Ocean itself is enrolled 
as one of the tīrthas in the accounting. Rajarajan (2016: 93) 
describes the dimensions of several South Indian temple 
tanks, including the Śivagaṅgā tank at Chidambaram. Com -
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   198 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 207] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water199
temple tanks is even named Śivagaṅgā:40 the tank 
is quite placid but the name suggests a dynamic 
process, so again this does not seem to have been a 
particularly troubling conceptual stumbling block 
for 11th-century contemporaries who participated 
in the same Śaiva tradition as Prambanan’s insti-
gators. It should be remarked that liṅgas are to be 
bathed in Chidambaram’s Śivagaṅgā tank (Smith 
1996: 72), so clearly the waters and the liṅgas are 
considered to be reciprocal influences, with each 
one bearing the potential to purify the other.
A fact that Jordaan so effectively exploited, the 
courtyard of its ‘Crystal Temple’ was deemed an 
Ocean of Milk in the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa. In 
advancing this symbolic expression, the Javanese 
may not have been the first: a precedent for the 
embodiment of a rainfall-fed Ocean of Milk may 
be found from seven or more decades earlier. In 
Nandivarman II’s 770 CE royal Vaikuṇṭa Perumāḻ 
temple (Hudson 2008: 4) we can observe a Pallava 
conceptual model for the Prambanan courtyard 
serving as an Ocean of Milk. And as with the Ocean 
at Prambanan, this instance at the Pallava-institut -
ed Vaikuṇṭa Perumāḻ seemingly benefitted from a 
literary mention, one by the Vaiṣṇava poet-saint 
Tirumaṅgai: ‘In this final stanza Tirumangai 
implies that Nandivarman will eventually receive 
this fruit. He also implies that the drainage moat 
surrounding the Vishnu-house is filled with water, 
that it is the Ocean of Milk, and that the Vimana in 
its midst is Vaikuntha on White Island. The black 
stone icon sitting inside is therefore Vaikuntha 
Perumal’ (Hudson 2008: 56). Noting that a rainwa -
ter drainage moat separates the Vaikuṇṭa Perumāḻ’s 
interior vimāna palace from a surrounding covered 
pared to Prambanan’s inner courtyard, which measures 110 
by 110 metres, we see that the South Indian correlates are 
similar in area. The terrain to the east of the Prambanan 
temple hosted its own tank. At the village of Telogo (‘Lake’) 
to the east of Prambanan lay an embankment that formed a 
water reservoir, functional at the time that it was seen and 
measured by Crawfurd during the British Interregnum in 
Java. Crawfurd reported that it measured 200 feet on each 
side (Crawfurd 1820b: 346).
40. Both Chidambaram and the Tiruvāṇṇamalai sites have 
1,000-pillared halls (Michell 2003: 50, 60), the significance 
of which should be carefully evaluated. Tiruvāṇṇamalai also 
boasts a tank of water anomalously called the Agni-tīrtha, no 
doubt related to the Liṅga of Fire that the temple harbours.circumambulation walkway, on which the history 
of the entire Pallava dynasty had been engraved, 
Hudson (2008: 7) further pointed out that ‘if the 
moat were plugged, however, the drainage would 
be like a moat surrounding a palace, or an ocean 
surrounding a mountain. The latter appears to be 
its original meaning.’ In the instance of the Vai -
kuṇṭa Perumāḻ, there is a bridge between walkway 
and vimāna. No such causeway was available to 
those admitted to Prambanan to worship.
This said, it is not clear at this point whether 
the Prambanan concept was not ultimately de -
rivative of an architecture implemented in South 
India, or alternately one initially implemented in 
the Matarām kingdom itself, some four decades 
before Nandivarman: the seventh strophe of King 
Sañjaya’s own 732 Canggal inscription, yet again 
displaying this phenomenological indifference 
between flowing and standing bodies of water, 
mentions the ‘wonderful place (yatrādbhuta) dedi -
cated to Śambhu (śambho ’stu), a heaven of heavens 
(divyatama), surrounded by the Gaṅgā and tīrthas 
(gaṅgāditīrthāvṛta )’. It could very well be that one 
of Prambanan’s core symbolisms had been con -
trived by the kingdom’s dynast more than 120 years 
before, and the surroundings of Sañjaya’s temple 
on Gunung Wukir should therefore be investigated 
with great thoroughness by archaeo-geophysicists.41
A second identification thrown forth by the 
Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa is that the temples are 
akin to Mount Mandara. Such would accord with 
contemporaneous South Indian conceptualizations 
of temples as mountains, where, for example, Rā-
jasiṃha’s temple is named Kailāsanātha, Rājarāja 
Cōḻa’s Bṛhadīśvara temple is explicitly proclaimed 
to be the Dakṣiṇāmeru, the Meru of the South, 
while still other South Indian temples are named 
after Kedāra (see also Shulman 1980: 18). The 
tower of the Kālamukha Kedāreśvara temple of 
Karnataka is explicitly analogized to Kedāra and 
its bathing streams for the ascetics to the Ganges 
in an inscription of the 12th century (Lorenzen 
1991: 103).
41. In a future publication, Peter Jordaan and I will examine 
linkages between features of the kingdom of Sañjaya c. 732 
and not only the disposition of the lands and temples around 
the modern Prambanan village but also the modern kratons  
of the Sultan of Yogyakarta and the Susuhunan  of Surakarta.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   199 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 208] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg200
Whether the Prambanan temple was also con-
sidered Mount Mandara by its Śaiva creators or 
whether it was conceptualized as a Meru—the spe -
cific mountains associated with Gaṅgā—is uncer-
tain to me, but the notion of a mountain or moun -
tains emerging from an ocean is firmly supported 
by one of the gold-foil consecration deposits found 
deep within the Śiva temple pit, directly under the 
yoni on which the Śiva statue stands. The instance 
of the gold foil reading varuṇaparvvata  (Fig. 9.24) 
affirms the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa’s claims of the 
presence of temple-mountains protruding from the 
seas.42 Although the full set of foundation deposits 
would need to be evaluated before a proper holistic 
assessment of the ensemble can be undertaken, 
ideally exploiting the new knowledge base about 
the Prambanan temple, it does seem that the name 
‘Varuṇa’, the supreme aqueous god, is the dominant 
name, although the artifact upon which it is found 
does require some explication.
On the same consecration foil as the ‘Varuṇa’ 
is the word parvvata, and in fact the spelling out of 
‘Varuṇa’ is interrupted by the superlinear r  token 
of parvvata: the parvvata intrudes into Varuṇa’s 
name, just as the temple protrudes from the 
courtyard waters. The significance of this deposit 
is substantial and multifarious, and bears upon the 
presence at Prambanan of a liṅgodbhava (‘Arising 
of the Liṅga’), for as Kumar (1983: 30) notes, the Ṛg  
Veda records that it was none other than Varuṇa 
who placed a ‘column of lustre’ in the cosmos, and 
it is precisely this ‘column’ that features in the 
liṅgodbhava myth.43 
42. This idea is further confirmed in the Pupus inscription, 
where a saṃ hyaṃ prasāda parvvata —a ‘holy temple-
mountain’—is the descriptor offered for a Dieng-area 
temple that was allocated to the descendants of King 
Sañjaya.
43. Handelman and Shulman (2004: 83) note the dif -
ferentiation of liṅgas at various prominent South Indian 
temples. There was a Liṅga of Wind at Kalahasti; of Fire at 
Tiruvāṇṇamalai or in the Bhairava myth; of Earth at Kāñcī; 
of Water at Tiruvanaikka; and of Space itself at Chidam -
baram. (In a future publication, I will propose that the fire 
contained within the pembakaran at the Ratu Boko escarp-
ment may have participated in this—much as a sacred fire, 
intimately associated with the Liṅga of Fire, was staged at 
Tiruvāṇṇamalai on the lofty hilltop overlooking the town 
and the temple).The relationship between Varuṇa and a 
parvvata-mountain suggested by the Prambanan 
gold foil deposit may be an echo of the myth that 
Gaṅgā,44 together with Śiva’s other wife Pārvatī, was 
the daughter of Meru. This may have some bearing—
discussed below—not only on the understanding 
of the Opak river which flows from Central Java’s 
‘Meru-api’ or the ‘Meru of Fire’, but also of the 
dynast Sañjaya and his ostensibly close association 
with Java’s Merapi volcano: the Old Sundanese 
Carita Parahyaṅan reports that Sañjaya was born 
there, and Sañjaya analogizes himself to Meru in 
his own extant expression of his Śaiva religiosity, 
the 732 CE Canggal inscription of Sanskrit verse 
from the Śaiva temple at Mount Wukir, a handful 
of miles to the east of the Borobudur stūpa.
The evidence of the Ocean in the courtyard 
supports the conclusion of Jordaan and others that 
a description of Prambanan underlay the Crystal 
Temple of the Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa. Apart from 
reinforcing the South Indian analogies of temples 
and mountains discussed above, this Rāmāyaṇa  
reference also seems to reinforce the liṅga concep -
tualization: Soumya James (2011: 176–177) remarks 
on the readily-acknowledged and little-disguised 
44. Glynn (1972: 19) noted that ‘the reasoning for the mar-
riage [between Śiva and Gaṅgā] may also revolve around the 
fact that she is carried in the jaṭā of Śiva, and consequently 
is always with him.’Fig. 9.24: The gold foil foundation deposit from the Śiva 
temple pit. The two lines are entangled, with the r  token 
of parvvata intruding into the three syllables varuṇa on 
the line above. Detail reproduced from Ijzerman 1891, 
volume 2, Plate XXII, Fig. 92.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   200 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 209] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water201
understanding of the churned nectar-producing 
Ocean and the churning stick as a sexual metaphor, 
so the liṅga-festooned temples are themselves the 
churner Mount Mandara, which means that yet 
again they are to be interpreted as the phalluses 
that do the churning.
Continuing with the themes of temples as 
mountains, mountains as churning sticks of the 
Ocean, and churning sticks as liṅgas, I should not 
omit pointing out that the liṅga-studded temples 
themselves jut out of Prambanan’s oceanic tīrtha. 
The sequence of associations naturally segues into 
the topic of liṅga- tīrthas. Kumar (1983: 359–383) 
provides a listing of the liṅga- tīrthas of India as 
listed in the Skandapurāṇa. As noted above, liṅgas 
were to be bathed in Chidambaram’s Śivagaṅgā 
tīrtha. Liṅga and lustral water are complementary 
quantities that together make a whole. Rajarajan 
(2016: 86), citing ‘the Liṅga in the Āṉaikkā gar-
bhagṛha… eternally surrounded by a pool of water’, 
even explicitly invokes the Śeṣaśāyī of the Kbal 
Spean site that has so much parallel value for ex-
plicating Prambanan. Davis (1991: 127, Fig. 9) no 
doubt addresses the power of this pairing when 
he observes that the liṅga and pīṭha constitute 
the Divine Body and Divine Throne, or Pure and 
Impure Domains, which ‘together substantiate an 
entire cosmos’.
I come to the point in my conjecture and 
analysis of the full dimensions of the Prambanan 
courtyard tīrtha where I must address another 
possible lithic symbolism incorporated into the 
Prambanan temple: if the thousand liṅgas on the 
superstructures and the balustrades of the eight 
principal Prambanan devālayas are all producing 
holy water with every raindrop that flows across 
them, and the eight temples are themselves con-
ceptualized as giant liṅgas capped with a single 
bulb, is the courtyard conceptually the recipient 
yoni into which all of this holy water flows? This 
possibility seems supported by Cambodian Śaiva 
practices where multiple liṅgas are depicted within 
a single yoni, an instance of which can be seen in 
Fig. 9.15 above. Accepting these as possible concep -
tual paradigms, the construal of Prambanan’s eight 
temples as liṅgas might make yet more sense, with 
the courtyard itself as the yoni, the beneficiary of the churning action and the fluid flows. At Pram-
banan, I observe, liquid gushes from 1,000 liṅgas, 
including the master one directly over the head of 
the Śiva embedded on the yoni in the garbhagṛha  
of the temple. It is not implausible to suspect that 
the temple is a massive symbol of cosmic fecundity 
and fertility, a deep appreciation of the waters that 
allowed the Matarām kingdom to be fertile.
The chief objection to this interpretation is the 
temple’s very poor correlation to a praṇāla spout, 
with eight unembellished drainage spouts orient-
ed in all the cardinal directions and not just the 
single north-pointing one of the paradigmatic yoni. 
There are points to be made for and against this 
interpretation, and the tension will sadly never be 
resolved for want of conclusive evidence.
the role of the ocean of milk  
in prambanan’s ‘axis of cosmogony’
In closing this detailed examination and expli -
cation of Roy Jordaan’s thesis of the Prambanan 
courtyard as an Ocean of Milk, I turn now to the cosmological implications of the presence of that 
motif at Prambanan. As touched on above, it is 
essential to note that as a conceptualization by 
Śaivas, the Ocean of Milk represents but a phase 
in the cosmic cycle: in the bas-relief depiction of 
Anantaśāyin that temple celebrants will encoun-
ter upon ascension of the primary staircase to 
the perambulation path of the Śiva temple, and 
periodically re-encounter on the inner balustrade 
each and every time they make another round of 
worshipful circumambulation, Viṣṇu is no longer 
‘the lord reclining on his snake-couch, in the deep 
yogic sleep out of which all creation proceeds’ of 
the Vaiṣṇavas’ own conceptualizations. (The Kbal 
Spean’s multiplicity of Viṣṇus and Brahmās in the 
replications of Ocean of Milk manifestations—
no fewer than nineteen of them—also seems to 
hold conceptually true at Prambanan, although 
at Kbal Spean they are encountered serially along 
the run of the river rather than periodo-cyclically 
as at Prambanan). The context promoted at the 
Prambanan temple almost certainly wrapped 
this primordial act of Viṣṇu in a Śaiva myth of 
cosmic predominance, in which Viṣṇu’s acts of 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   201 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 210] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg202
the creations of universes and Brahmā’s acts of 
the creation of mobile and immobile beings oc -
curred repetitiously, as the initial unfoldings of 
new sṛṣṭi (emissive) processes directed by Śiva, as 
widely described in the major Śaiva purāṇas and 
āgamas. The witnessing of the Oceanic birth of 
Viṣṇu’s cosmos by a group of five Śaiva ṛṣi s—in 
a future publication I identify them as the pañ -
cakuśika s, headed in Java by Pātañjala in lieu of 
the Lakulīśa of the Indic Pāśupata texts (see Sarkar 
[1967: 641–642] and Acri 2014)—clearly shows it 
to be an episodic event particularized within a 
Śaiva narrative.
The cosmogenesis and hierophany requires the 
intervention of saṃhāra—the cosmic dissolution—
the recurrent point at which the old universe had 
been pulverized, incinerated, and inundated, with 
Śiva then unfolding himself into a Viṣṇu and a 
Brahmā for the subsequent and subsidiary expan-
sion into the newly regenerated universe, an entity 
that Hudson (2008: 311) calls ‘spacetime’. Thus the 
Śaiva Ocean is the yugānta-toya, the water at the 
end of a yuga, and simultaneously the primordial 
samudra, also divinely provided through the ac -
tivity of Śiva.
The liminal Ocean of Milk stands between the 
saṃhāra and the renewed sṛṣṭi, and in the context 
of Prambanan whose Ocean is filled by cloudbursts 
sanctified by passage over its thousand Gaṅgā -
vatāraṇa- liṅgas, consideration of another passage 
of the Liṅgapurāṇa (54.32–40; Shastri 1951: 212–213) 
demonstrates a deep linkage to the mechanism 
that seems to both provide and sanctify the water 
that fills Prambanan’s courtyard: the conservation 
of matter and the generation of clouds out of the 
smoke of the burning of the world in the saṃhāra:
The waters drunk by the sun penetrate the 
moon gradually and from the moon they drip 
down to the clouds. On being tossed about by 
the wind, the cluster of clouds causes shower 
on the earth…. There is no destruction of 
water. The same water revolves. For the welfare 
of creatures, the waters have been evolved by 
lord Śiva as their ultimate resort. The waters 
alone constitute Bhū, Bhuvaḥ, Svaḥ, anna  
(cooked rice) as well as nectar. The waters 
are the vital breaths of the worlds, the living 
beings, the worlds themselves. Of what avail is much talk? The world of mobile and immobile 
beings is constituted by the waters. Lord Śiva 
is the overlord of the waters. He is glorified as 
such. The universe is identical with him. What 
is there to wonder at in this? The designation 
Nārāyaṇa was acquired by Viṣṇu by the grace 
of the waters. Viṣṇu is the abode of worlds 
and the waters constitute his abode. When 
the mobile and immobile beings are being 
burned by the fire and tossed up as smoke by 
the wind, the vapours that go up urged by the 
wind form the clouds. Hence the mixture of 
smoke, fire and wind is called cloud. The word 
abhra  (cloud) is derived as follows: ‘that which 
showers water’.
In the fuller version of this chapter, I will point 
to devices at the heart of Prambanan’s central Śiva 
temple that demonstrate both cosmology—the 
mastery and command of kāla, or spacetime, inte-
grated into the great statue of Śiva on the yoni in the 
central garbhagṛha, primarily the Egg of Brahmā 
(Brahmāṇḍa), the prolate spheroid contained in 
the lower left hand of the statue (see Fig. 9.1). 
As well, I will argue, the temple points to an 
avenue for the transcendence of that spacetime, 
a soteriology indicated in the depiction of a very 
special bas relief figure—seemingly half man, half 
serpent, the top half being the torso of a man, the 
lower half a coiled snake, the human head shroud -
ed by a serpent’s hood, with hands folded in his 
lap in the manner of the corresponding archi -
trave figure at the nearby Buddhist Candi Kalasan, 
sitting in either in water or amidst clouds or even 
amidst both clouds and water—posed on the apex 
of the architrave directly above the entrance to the 
central garbhagṛha. This architrave figure is man-
ifestly important—it is positioned above even the 
trio of the seated Śiva and consorts, demarcated 
by a Kāla-head—and likely highly diagnostic for 
the Prambanan temple; its importance was already 
signalled by Jordaan (1996b: 216, Photo 26). In the 
fuller version of this chapter—the considerations 
are too lengthy to be adequately presented here, 
but for the moment suffice it to point to quite 
similar painted and iconic depictions of the de -
miserpent Patañjali at the Chidambaram temple 
in South India—I will argue extensively that the 
figure is the yogin Patañjali, the author of the Yo-
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   202 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 211] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water203
Figs. 9.25a, 9.25b: Top (a): The shrine positioned at the precise centrepoint of the inner courtyard, just to the 
left of the stairway that brings the worshipper laterally to the circumambulation promenade and vertically to 
the garbhagṛha of Śiva. Photo courtesy of Roy Jordaan. Bottom (b): A graphic depicting major elements of the 
cosmogenetic imagery at the heart of the Prambanan temple. Image courtesy of Peter Jordaan.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   203 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 212] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg204
gasūtra and purportedly other erudite works, who 
in South Indian Śaiva texts acquired a mythicized 
dimension as a serpent integrally associated with 
the fundamental activities of Śiva, particularly with 
the Ocean and the dance that are the principal 
expressions of kāla at the Prambanan temple.45 The 
nāga Patañjali is attested in these Tamil myths as 
the principal promoter of Śiva’s cosmic tāṇḍava  
dance, and in his prior incarnation as the snake 
Ananda upon whom Viṣṇu slumbers on the Ocean 
of Milk (Handelman and Shulman 2004: 67–79), 
45.  Of the dance and Kāla, Heinrich Zimmer (1933: 38) 
wrote that ‘Time itself is absorbed and carried by the move -
ment of the image of Śiva Naṭarāja. His figure dances the 
flux of time and all it carries, produces, changes and devours. 
These images are far from showing one phase of the dance or 
one moment only of time. Dance in them is a state and sug-
gests the totality of the flux of time.’ This elegantly phrased 
expression was used as the epigram to Wessels-Mevissen’s 
(2012: 298) own study of the Naṭeśa figure.and in both bodies we see Patañjali’s presence as 
nāga insinuating itself into the first segment of 
the Śiva shrine’s balustrade, on both its inward 
and outward facets. The architrave demiserpent 
I identify as the nāga-yogin Patañjali—perhaps 
Śiva’s principal or most consequential emanation 
for the purposes of the lore of the Prambanan 
temple, placed front-and-centre in the position 
that would be occupied by Lakulīśa in a Pāśupata 
temple—is a critical participant in an ‘triangle of 
cosmogenesis’ between the garbhagṛha and the 
Ocean on the Śiva temple, with both aspects of his 
alter egos overseeing and underpinning much of it. 
A further expression of Prambananian cleverness, 
then, is the architrave figure Patañjali surveilling 
his own subsidiary and simultaneous manifesta-
tions on the Ocean of Milk panel many metres 
below, where he incorporates himself organically 
as the nāga of the cosmogonic trio where Viṣṇu and Brahmā are introduced to the world as Kāla Fig. 9.26: The demiserpent depicted above the entrance to the Śiva garbhagṛha. The author argues that this figure 
is to be identified as Patañjali, both the yogin as well as his mythic alter ego, the serpent who promoted Śiva’s 
fundamental cosmic activities. Image courtesy of Roy Jordaan as amplified by Peter Jordaan.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   204 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 213] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water205
and Kāla, and once again as the Śaiva yogin Pātañ -
jala at the head of the other pañcakuśikas, not to 
mention his association with the cosmoregulato-
ry tāṇḍava performance. I can think of no other 
candidate identification from the Śaiva world who 
matches the figure on the Prambanan lintel, much 
less one that carries as much explanatory power 
for the iconography of the centrepoint balustrades 
of Prambanan or elsewhere in the other temples 
within sight of the lintel figure. The identifica -
tion of the figure as Patañjali, I believe, uniquely 
unlocks the symbolism at the centrepoint of Pram -
banan and allows its conceptual coherence to be 
appreciated. It also is sublimated into a yet-higher 
soteriological importance, for the serpent seems 
to implicate the Prambanan temple’s omnipresent 
Śaiva yogins—masters of transit and fluid transi-
tion—in the generations of the worlds as well as 
the technique of release from them.
conclusion
One of the objectives of this chapter was to docu-
ment the conceptual innovations of the Javanese 
Śaivas. The imposition of iconic Śiva upon the yonis 
in place of an aniconic liṅga, and the ideation of 
Brahmā and Viṣṇu as yoni-mounted mahādevas, 
is one innovation. The courtyard-as-tīrtha-as-
Ocean depiction was yet another for which the 
Javanese Śaivas deserve credit as originators. The 
Gaṅgāvatāraṇa-sahasraliṅga array is a third in a 
tally of the temple’s innovations. The density and 
form of the cosmogonic imagery at the centre of 
its temple—the full explication waits for a future 
publication—is seemingly yet another, imaginative 
expression that retains conceptual fidelity to major 
Śaiva myths and theology of the day. The time is 
therefore ripe to look for further instances of Śaiva 
brilliance at the temple and on the island, and to 
look abroad for ripples from Prambanan’s gigantic 
tīrtha in the Śaiva world at large.
In light of the considerations laid out above, 
and especially in light of the depictions of liṅgas 
at the Kbal Spean site, the author hopes to have 
substantially vindicated and further developed Roy 
Jordaan’s vision of the flooding of the Prambanan 
courtyard as an act of religious symbolism. He is 
very much a founder of a feast.References
Acri, Andrea. 2014. ‘Pañcakuśika and Kanda  
Mpat: From a Pāśupata Myth to Balinese  
Folklore’, The Journal of Hindu Studies 7: 
146–178.
Acri, Andrea and Roy Jordaan. 2012. ‘The Dikpālas 
of Ancient Java Revisited: A New Identification 
for the 24 Directional Deities on the Śiva 
Temple of the Loro Jonggrang Complex’, 
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde  
168/2–3: 274–313.
Adiceam, Marguerite. 1976. ‘Les images de Śiva  
dans l’Inde du Sud, Part XV: Gaṅgādharamūrti’, 
Arts Asiatique 32: 99–138.
Ari Setyastuti. 2011. ‘Belajar dari kearifan local 
nenek moyang dalam rekayasa lahan dan 
pembangunan Candi Prambanan’, Buletin 
Narasimha 4: 10–14.
Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala Yogya -
karta. 2007. Pusaka Aksara Yogyakarta: Alih 
Aksara dan Alih Bahasa Prasasti Koleksi Balai 
Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala Yogyakar -
ta. Yogyakarta: Balai Pelestarian Peninggalan 
Purbakala Yogyakarta.
Bosch, F.D.K. 1922. ‘God Brahmaa omringd door 
Maharsi’s (Epigrafische en iconografische 
aanteekeningen)’, Oudheidkundig Verslag 1922: 
66–70, republished in translation in Jordaan 
1996b: 153–155.
Boulbet, Jean. 1974. ‘Phnom Kulen, paysage rural 
particulier au Cambodge’, Études Rurales 53–56, 
‘Agriculture et Sociétés en Asie du Sud-Est’ 
(Janvier-Décembre 1974): 193–205.
Boulbet, Jean and Bruno Dagens. 1973. ‘Les sites 
archéologiques de la région du Bhnaṃ Gūlen 
(Phnom Kulen)’, Arts Asiatiques 27: 3–130.
Bunker, Emma and Douglas Latchford. 2004. 
Adoration and Glory: The Golden Age of Khmer 
Art. Chicago: Art Media Resources.
. 2011. Khmer Bronzes: New Interpretations 
of the Past. Chicago: Art Media Resources.
de Casparis, Johannes G. 1956. Selected Inscriptions 
from the 7th to the 9th Century A.D. (Prasasti 
Indonesia II). Bandung: Masa Baru.
Chemburkar, Swati and Shivani Kapoor. 2018. 
‘The Pāśupata Sect in Ancient Cambodia and 
Champa’, in Peter Sharrock and Vo Van Thang 
(eds.), Vibrancy in Stone: Masterpieces from  
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   205 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 214] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg206
the Danang Museum of Cham Sculpture,  
pp. 45–56. Bangkok: River Books.
Chihara, Daigoro. 1996. Hindu-Buddhist Architec-
ture in Southeast Asia. Leiden/New York/Köln: 
E.J. Brill.
Crawfurd, John. 1820a. ‘The Ruins of Prambanan in 
Java’, Asiatick Researches; or, Transactions of the 
Society Instituted in Bengal for Enquiring into 
the History and Antiquities, the Arts, Sciences, 
and Literature of Asia 13: 337–368.
. 1820b. History of the Indian Archipelago; 
Containing an Account of the Manners, Arts, 
Languages, Religions, Institutions, and Com -
merce of its Inhabitants. Two volumes. Edin -
burgh: Constable. 
Dagens, Bruno. 2005. ‘Le temple et le miroir à 
travers le monde indien’, in Bruno Dagens,  
Marie-Luce Barazer-Billoret, and Vincent 
Lefèvre (eds.), Traités, Temples et Images du 
Monde Indien. É tudes d’histoire et d’archéo -
logie , pp. 181–201. Pondicherry/Paris: Presses  
Sorbonne nouvelle/Institut français de Pon -
dich éry.
Daud Aris Tanudirjo. 2011. ‘Pemugaran Kembali 
Candi Siwa pascagempa 2006: perspektif arke -
ologi’, Buletin Narasimha  4: 15–22.
Davis, Richard. 1991. Ritual in an Oscillating 
Universe: Worshipping Śiva in Medieval India . 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Degroot, Véronique. 2008. ‘Ancient Bathing Places 
of Central Java: A Short Survey’, Aziatische 
Kunst  38/4: 62–68.
. 2013. Magical Prambanan . Yogyakarta: P.T. 
Taman Wisata Candi Borobudur, Prambanan 
& Ratu Boko.
. 2017. ‘The Liangan temple site in Central 
Java’, Archipel  94: 191–209.
Dhaky, Madhusudan. 2004. ‘Javanese pīthikās  of 
Śivalingas’, South Asian Studies 20/1: 1–7.
Dinas Purbakala Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta. 1993. 
Laporan Pembenahan Halaman Pusat Candi 
Prambanan Tanggal 15 Juni s/d 15 September, 
1993. Bogem: Panitia Pemugaran Candi Wahana 
Candi Lorojonggrang Prambanan Daerah 
Istimewa Yogyakarta, Dinas Purbakala.
Eliade, Mircea. 1976. ‘The World, the City, the 
House’, in Mircea Eliade (ed.), Occultism, 
Witchcraft, and Cultural Fashions: Essays in Comparative Religions , pp. 18–31. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Gillet, Valérie. 2010. La cr éation d’une iconographie 
śivaïte narrative. Incarnations du dieu dans les 
temples Pallava construits. Pondicherry: Ins -
titut Fran çais de Pondichéry/École Fran çaise 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Glynn, Catherine. 1972. ‘Some Reflections on the 
Origin of the Type of Gaṅgā Image’, Journal 
of Indian Society of Oriental Art , New Series 5 
(Dr. V.S. Agrawala Commemoration Volume, 
Part 2): 16–27.
Goudriaan, Teun and Christiaan Hooykaas. 1971. 
Stuti and Stava  (Bauddha, Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava ) 
of Balinese Brahman Priests . Amsterdam/
London: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Griffiths, Arlo. 2011. ‘Imagine Laṅkapura at Pram -
banan’, in Andrea Acri, Helen Creese, and Arlo 
Griffiths (eds.), From Laṅkā Eastwards: The 
Rāmāyaṇa in the Literature and Visual Arts 
of Indonesia , pp. 133–148. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Guy, John. 2014. ‘Introducing Early Southeast Asia’, 
in John Guy (ed.), Lost Kingdoms: Hindu-Bud -
dhist Sculpture of Early Southeast Asia . New 
York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Handelman, Don and David Shulman. 2004. Śiva 
in the Forest of Pines: An Essay on Sorcery and 
Self-Knowledge . New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Hooykaas, Christiaan. 1966. Sūrya-Sevana: The Way 
to God of a Balinese Śiva Priest . Amsterdam: 
Noord-Hollandsche Uitgevers Maatschappij.
Hudson, D. Dennis. 2008. The Body of God: An 
Emperor’s Palace for Krishna in Eighth-Century 
Kanchipuram . New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Ijzerman, J.W. 1891. Beschrijving der Oudheden 
nabij de Grens der Residentie’s Soerakarta en 
Djogdjakarta . Two volumes. Batavia: Lands -
drukkerij.
Jacques, Claude. 1999. ‘Les inscriptions du Phnom 
Kbal Spãn (K. 1011, 1012, 1015 et 1016) [Études 
d’épigraphie cambodgienne XI]’, Bulletin de 
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient  86: 357–374.
James, Soumya. 2011. The Symbiosis of Image, 
Monument, and Landscape: A Study of Select 
Goddess Images at Prasat Kravan, Kbal Spean, 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   206 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 215] ---
The Prambanan Temple as a Sahasraliṅga Mechanism for the Consecration of Water207
and Banteay Srei in Cambodia . PhD disserta -
tion, Cornell University.
Jordaan, Roy. 1989. ‘A Holy Water Sanctuary at 
Prambanan’, Amerta: Berkala Arkeologi 11: 
17–41.
. 1991. ‘Text, Temple, Tīrtha’, in Lokesh 
Chandra (ed.), The Art and Culture of South-
East Asia , pp. 165–181. Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
. 1993. Imagine Buddha in Prambanan: 
Reconsidering the Buddhist Background of  
the Loro Jonggrang Temple Complex . Leiden: 
Vakgroep Talen en Cultures van Zuidoost-
Azië en Ocienië, Reiksuniversiteit te Leiden.
. 1995. ‘Prambanan 1995: A Hypothesis 
Confirmed’, IIAS Newsletter  6: 37.
. 1996a. ‘Candi Prambanan: An Updated 
Introduction’, in Roy E. Jordaan, In Praise of 
Prambanan. Dutch essays on the Loro Jong -
grang temple complex , pp. 3–115. Leiden: KITLV 
Press.
. 1996b. In Praise of Prambanan. Dutch 
essays on the Loro Jonggrang temple complex . 
Leiden: KITLV Press.
. 2011. ‘The Causeway Episode of Pramba -
nan Reexamined’, in Andrea Acri, Helen 
Creese and Arlo Griffiths (eds.), From Laṅkā 
Eastwards: The Rāmāyaṇa in the Literature 
and Visual Arts of Indonesia , pp. 179–207. 
Leiden: KITLV Press.
Kaimal, Padma. 2013. ‘Lakṣmī and the Tigers: A 
Goddess in the Shadows’, in Charlotte Schmid 
and Emmanuel Francis (eds.), The Archaeology 
of Bhakti I , pp. 143–175. Pondicherry: École 
fran çaise d’Extrême-Orient/Institut fran çais 
de Pondichéry.
Kapoor, Shivani. 2019. ‘Iconography of Pashupa -
ta Ascetics in Cambodia’, Orientations  50/1: 
122–131.
Karunaratne, Kusuma. 2008. Rājaratnāka -
raya (The Gem Mine of Kings) by Venerable 
Mahathera Abhayaraja Pirivanea Valgampaya. 
Colombo: Ministry of Cultural Affairs.
Karunaratne, T.B. 1990. ‘The Healing Power of 
the Waters of Anavatapta’, Sri Lanka Journal 
of Humanities 16: 137–155.
Kim, Bo-Kyung. 2007. Indefinite Boundaries: 
Reconsidering the Relationship Between Boro-
budur and Loro Jonggrong in Central Java . PhD dissertation, University of California at 
Los Angeles.
Krom, N.J. 1923. Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaan -
sche kunst, Volume I (2nd ed). ’s-Gravenhage: 
Martinus Nijhoff. Partially republished in 
translation in Jordaan 1996b: 147–152.
Kumar, Savitri. 1983. The Paurāṇic Lore of Holy 
Water-Places: With Special Reference to Skanda 
Purāṇa . Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Levin, Cecelia. 2011. ‘The Grand Finale: The 
Uttarakāṇḍa  of the Loro Jonggrang temple 
complex’, in Andrea Acri, Helen Creese, and 
Arlo Griffiths (eds.), From Laṅkā Eastwards: 
The Rāmāyaṇa in the Visual Arts and Litera -
ture of Indonesia , pp. 149–178. Leiden: KITLV 
Press.
Lippe, Aschwin. 1971. ‘Divine Images in Stone  
and Bronze: South India, Chola Dynasty  
(c. 850-1280)’, Metropolitan Museum Journal  
4: 29–79. 
van Lohuizen-de Leeuw, J.E. 1955. ‘The Dikpālakas 
in Ancient Java’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- 
en Volkenkunde 111: 356–384.
Lokesh Chandra. 1989. ‘Preface’, in Willem 
F. Stutterheim, Rāma Legends and Rāma 
Reliefs in Indonesia , pp. 9–15. Delhi: Abhinav 
Publications.
Lorenzen, David. 1991. The Kāpālikas and the 
Kālāmukhas: Two Lost Śaivite Sects . Second 
revised edition. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Mevissen, Gerd. 1996. ‘The Suggestion of Movement: 
A Contribution to the Study of Chariot-shaped 
Structures in Indian Temple-architecture’, in 
Debala Mitra (ed.), Explorations in Art and 
Archaeology of South Asia: Essays Dedicated 
to N.G. Majumdar, pp. 477–512. Calcutta: 
Directorate of Archaeology and Museums, 
Government of West Bengal. 
. 2002. ‘The Nṛtta-sabhā at Chidambaram: 
Some Remarks’, in R. Nagaswamy (ed.), 
Foundations of Indian Art: Proceedings of the 
Chidambaram Seminar on Art and Religion, 
February 2001 , pp. 61–71. Chennai: Tamil Arts 
Academy.
Michell, George. 2003. Temple Towns of Tamil 
Nadu . London: Sangam.
Mills, Libbie. 2019. Temple Design in Six Early Śaiva 
Scriptures: Critical Edition and Translation 
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   207 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 216] ---
Jeffrey Sundberg208
of the Prāsādalakṣaṇa-portions of the Bṛhat -
kālottara, Devyāmata, Kiraṇa, Mohacūrottara, 
Mayasaṃgraha & Piṅgalāmata . Pondicherry: 
Institut Fran çais de Pondichéry/École Fran çaise 
d’Extrême-Orient.
Monius, Anne. 2001. Imagining a Place for Bud -
dhism: Literary Culture and Religious Commu-
nity in Tamil-speaking South India . London: 
Oxford University Press.
Pigeaud, Theodore. G. Th. 1924. De Tantu Pang -
gelaran. ’s-Gravenhage: H.L. Smits
Poerbatjaraka. 1932. ‘Het Oud-Javaansche 
Rāmāyaṇa’, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 72: 151–601.
Rajarajan, R.K.K. 2016. ‘“Tirukkuḷam” or “Teppak -
kuḷam” of South India: “Jalavāstu”?’, Pandanus 
16: Nature in Literature, Art, Myth and Ritual 
10/2: 83–104.
Rita Margaretha Setianingsih. 1998. ‘Dua batu 
berhias dari ruas Sungai Opak, data tamba -
han pembangunan percandian Prambanan’, in 
Seminar Sehari Manfaat Kajian Prasasti dalam 
Penelitian Arkeologi dan Sejarah . Yogyakarta: 
Balai Arkeologi – Suaka Peninggalan Sejarah 
dan Purbakala Yogyakarta.
. 1969. ‘South-India in Old Javanese and 
Sanskrit inscriptions’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 125/2: 193–206.
Sarkan, Himansu. 1967. ‘The evolution of the 
Śiva-Buddha cult in Java’, Journal of Indian 
History  45/3: 637–646.
. 1969. ‘South-India in Old Javanese and 
Sanskrit inscriptions’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, 
Land- en Volkenkunde 125/2: 193–206.
. 1971. Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java 
(Corpus inscriptionum Javanicarum), up to 928 
A.D.  Two volumes. Calcutta: K.L. Muk -
hopadhyay. [Two volumes].
Sarma, I.K. 1999. ‘Beginnings of Temple Archi -
tecture at Kanchipuram, Raw Materials and 
Religious Impacts’, in B.M. Pande, Brajadulal 
Chattopadhyaya, and A. Ghosh (eds.), Archae -
ology and History: Essays in Memory of Shri A. 
Ghosh , Vol. 2 , pp. 545–551. Delhi: Agam Kala 
Prakashan. 
Sharrock, Peter. 2009. ‘Hevajra at Banteay Chhmar’, 
The Journal of the Walters Art Museum (‘A Cu -rator’s Choice: Essays in Honor of Hiram W. 
Woodward, Jr’) 64/65: 49–64.
Shastri, J.L. 1951. The Linga Purāna . Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass.
Shulman, David. 1980. Tamil Temple Myths: Sac -
rifice and Divine Marriage in the South Indian 
Śaiva Tradition . Princeton: Princeton Univer -
sity Press.
Smith, David. 1996. The Dance of Śiva: Religion, 
Art, and Poetry in South India . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Sokrithy, Im, Chhay Rachna, Kim Samnang,  
and Darryl Collins. 2004. Kbal Spean:  
Ancient Stone Artifacts, 1st Edition . Siem  
Reap: Apsara.
Sundberg, Jeffrey. 2011. ‘The Old Sundanese 
Carita Parahyangan , King Warak, and the 
Fracturing of the Javanese Polity, c. 803 A.D.’, 
in Manjushree Gupta (ed.), From Beyond the 
Eastern Horizon: Essays in Honour of Professor 
Lokesh Chandra , pp. 143–157. New Delhi: Aditya 
Prakashan.
. 2016. ‘Mid-9th Century Adversity for  
Sinhalese Esoteric Buddhist Exemplars in  
Java: Lord Kumbhayoni and the “Rag-wearer” 
Paṃsukūlika  Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra’, 
in Andrea Acri (ed.), Esoteric Buddhism in  
Mediaeval Maritime Asia: Networks of Masters, 
Texts, Icons,  pp. 349–380. Singapore: ISEAS – 
Yusof Ishak Institute.
Tawa, Michael. 2001. ‘At Kbal Spean’, Architectural 
Theory Review  6/1: 134–155.
Vogel, J.Ph. 1921. ‘Het eerste Rama relief van Pram -
banan’, Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volken -
kunde  77/1: 202–215.
Wessels-Mevissen, Corinna. 2012. ‘The Early Image 
of Śiva Naṭarāja: Aspects of Time and Space’, 
in Dietrich Boschung and Corinna Wessels-
Mevissen (eds.), Figurations of Time in Asia ,  
pp. 298–348. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag.
Yocum, Glenn. 1976. ‘Manikkavacakar’s image of 
Śiva’, History of Religions 16/1: 20–41.
Zimmer, Heinrich. 1933. ‘Some Aspects of  
Time in Indian Art’, Journal of the Indian 
Society of Oriental Art 1: 30–51.
09_CreSouthV2_6P_29Jul22.indd   208 29/7/22   3:16 PM

--- [Page 217] ---
Chapter 10
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan,  
East Java
HADI SIDOMULYO
Penanggungan is the name of an extinct 
volcano lying in the province of East Java 
near the city of Surabaya. Although rising 
just 1,650 m above sea-level, the mountain forms 
an impressive landmark on the northern plains, 
where it serves as a natural boundary separating 
the regencies of Pasuruan and Mojokerto (Fig. 
10.1). To the east, at a distance of some 25 km, can 
be found the ancient site of Majapahit at Trowulan 
(Mojokerto), while to the south lie the majestic 
peaks of the Arjuna-Welirang massif. 
One only has to glance at Penanggungan’s 
unique form, comprising four minor prominences 
arranged symmetrically around a steep conical 
summit, to understand how the mountain came 
to be identified with the sacred five-peaked Mahā-
meru of Hindu and Buddhist tradition. Available 
historical sources confirm that Mt Penanggungan 
was formerly known as Pavitra1 (‘pure’, ‘holy’, ‘pu -
rifying’), a name referred to in both early Javanese 
and Sundanese literature, as well as in at least one 
10th-century inscription from eastern Java.2 Ac-
cording to a legend immortalized in the Old Java-
nese Tantu Paṅgәlaran, the holy Mahāmeru was 
removed from its original position in the Himalaya 
and brought to Java through the combined effort 
of the gods. During the journey, however, the 
1. In this chapter I conform to the transliteration system 
used throughout the volume for Sanskrit and Old Java -
nese. It should be pointed out, however, that the letter v is 
customarily written and pronounced as w by the people of 
Indonesia, hence Pawitra instead of Pavitra, Wiṣṇu rather 
than Viṣṇu, etc.
2. Fns. 23 and 24 below.topmost section became detached and fell to earth, 
forming the mountain Pavitra, while the remaining 
mass was set down in the Tengger highlands at the 
eastern end of the island, becoming known as Mt 
Semeru (3,676 m), Java’s highest peak. 
Given the mountain’s supreme sanctity, as well 
as its proximity to the former Majapahit capital, 
it is hardly surprising that Penanggungan pre -
serves an abundance of archaeological remains. 
Curiously, however, it was not until about eighty 
years ago that this rich cultural legacy began to 
attract serious attention. While it is true that a 
number of ancient sites located at the foot of the 
mountain, such as Jolotundo, Belahan and Jedong, 
had already been documented during the 19th 
century, there was little knowledge of the condi-
tions on the upper slopes. Early published field 
reports are limited to a brief note concerning 
the remnants of a structure on the mountain’s 
summit by the vulcanologist H. Zollinger (1846: 
134) and a romantic description of Candi Selokelir 
by F.L. Broekveldt (1904: 23–27), who visited the 
site in 1900 while serving as controleur at Trawas 
(Mojokerto). There are, in addition, a few ref -
erences to Mt Penanggungan in the bulletins 
of the Archaeological Service of the Dutch East 
Indies from 1914 onwards, but they comprise for 
the most part rather vague second-hand reports, 
which are often insufficient to identify precisely 
the places described.3
3. Cf. Oudheidkundig Verslag  1914: 203; 1915: 2; 1921: 150; 
1923: 8, 80–82; Bosch 1918: 211 (no. 1710), 224–226 (nos. 1754, 
1755).
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   209 5/8/22   2:32 PM

--- [Page 218] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo210
It is not until the fourth decade of the 20th 
century that some clarity begins to emerge. In 1936 
a systematic exploration of the upper slopes of Mt 
Penanggungan was initiated by W.F. Stutterheim, 
who had in that year succeeded F.D.K. Bosch as 
head of the Archaeological Service of the Dutch 
East Indies. The programme was initially under-
taken in collaboration with A. Gall, a like-minded 
enthusiast residing in Surabaya.4 This combined 
effort yielded spectacular results, aided partly (to 
quote Stutterheim) by the ‘untiring activity of 
Mr Gall’, as well as the fortuitous occurrence of a 
forest fire which cleared extensive tracts of long 
grass (glagah ) on the mountain slopes (Stutterheim 
1936: 26). No less than thirty hitherto unknown 
archaeological sites could immediately be added 
to those already listed, along with several minor 
4. Gall had already conducted a preliminary survey of the 
villages surrounding the base of the mountain in 1935. For 
a report of his findings, see Oudheidkundig Verslag 1936: 
15–17.discoveries. Each site was provided with a Roman 
numeral, and by the time the exploration came to 
an end in 1940 the number officially registered had 
reached eighty-one. Tragically, Stutterheim never 
published the results of his exploration, making 
it exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, to verify 
each and every one of his discoveries today—a 
fact which becomes painfully evident when we 
examine the post-war literature on the subject.
An illustrated report, published in 1951 by the 
newly established Dinas Purbakala Republik In -
donesia, remains the standard introduction to the 
archaeology of Mt Penanggungan. Compiled by 
a team under the direction of the architect V.R. 
van Romondt, the work was an attempt to salvage 
the surviving data from the 1930’s exploration 
in the wake of the Japanese occupation and sub-
sequent struggle for Indonesian independence. 
As van Romondt himself announces with regret 
in the opening paragraph, the Archaeological 
Service suffered ‘enormous losses’ in the turbu -
lent years following Stutterheim’s death in 1942, 
Fig. 10.1: Mt Penanggungan, viewed from the village of Trawas, Mojokerto. (Photo: Hadi Sidomulyo)
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   210 5/8/22   2:32 PM

--- [Page 219] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java211
and among them was much documentary mate-
rial pertaining to Mt Penanggungan. The scale 
of this loss becomes apparent when we examine 
the individual descriptions of the archaeological 
remains, a task delegated to a man named Ichwani, 
who had himself worked under Stutterheim as a 
senior draughtsman. Of the original eighty-one 
sites registered, no more than fifty are described in 
the text, and of those only thirty-five are marked 
on the appended hand-drawn map. As to the re-
mainder, no information whatsoever is provided.5 
Yet despite its shortcomings, the 1951 publication 
is a valuable reference and provides a solid foun-
dation for further study.
As to progress made during the second half 
of the 20th century, field surveys on Mt Penang-
gungan tended to be sporadic and short-lived. A 
brief expedition led by Drs Tjokro Sudjono in 1975 
succeeded in documenting some hitherto unre -
ported fragmentary remains on the mountain’s 
northern side, notably on the minor summit of 
Gajahmungkur. Then, eight years later, a team 
of archaeology students from the University of 
Indonesia conducted a two-week survey aimed 
principally at compiling an updated inventory of 
Penanggungan’s ancient monuments. Using van 
Romondt’s publication as a guide, the expedition 
succeeded in documenting forty-four archaeolog -
ical sites, thirty-five of which were identified with 
those originally listed by Stutterheim.6 This was 
followed up in 1991–1992 by a comprehensive field 
study involving the collaboration of several sci-
entific institutions, coordinated by Drs Maulana 
Ibrahim. The final report included an appended 
map displaying fifty-five sites. In all of the above 
cases, however, the data submitted tended to be 
unreliable; a problem observed and for the most 
part remedied by Agus Aris Munandar in his 
MA thesis of 1990, but even that work is not free 
of errors. 
Such was the situation when the present writer 
set out to investigate the terraced sanctuaries on 
Mt Penanggungan in May 2012. It could hardly 
5. An additional sixteen Roman numerals are, in fact, 
visible on the map, but these are not supported by any 
further explanation in the text.
6. Agus Aris Munandar et al. 1983.have been conceived then that it would lead to a 
full-scale exploration now entering its eighth year. 
Over that period the mountain slopes have revealed 
an extraordinary wealth of archaeological remains, 
far exceeding all expectations. 
exploration of mt penanggungan, 
2012–2018
In retrospect, the present survey shares quite a few 
similarities with the exploration in the 1930s. To 
begin with, it has been blessed consistently with 
the same spirit of unflagging enthusiasm as that 
exhibited by Gall, who is reported to have ‘pursued, 
often in vain, even the vaguest traces reported 
by peasants and foresters working on the upper 
slopes’ (Stutterheim 1936: 26). Another interesting 
parallel is the extensive fire on the mountain in 
2015, which effectively cleared all the obstructing 
vegetation and thus greatly facilitated the search for 
archaeological sites, precisely as it had eighty years 
earlier. It seems, however, that the fire of 1935–1936 
did not extend to the southern and eastern slopes, 
for which reason perhaps almost no discoveries 
were reported in those areas at the time. As will 
be seen, a number of significant monuments have 
been documented on both the northeastern slope 
of Penanggungan and the adjacent hill of Kemu-
ncup in the last few years, while the south and 
southeastern sections are certainly not lacking in 
archaeological remains. 
Turning now to specifics, the following is a brief 
progress report of the survey conducted on Mt 
Penanggungan by the present writer between the 
years 2012 and 2018, with a focus on some of the 
highlights of the expedition:
2012
Beginning in the month of May, attention was 
focused on the monuments described in van 
Romondt’s publication of 1951. The aim was to 
confirm their locations, as well as verify the data 
compiled by previous visitors. By the end of the 
year a total of sixty-one sites had been documented, 
forty of which could positively be identified with 
those originally listed by Stutterheim, along with 
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   211 5/8/22   2:32 PM

--- [Page 220] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo212
a further four question marks. As to the rest, nine 
had already been reported during various expedi-
tions between 1975 and 1992, while the remaining 
eight appeared to represent new data. 
The year saw three significant discoveries, the 
first of which was a group of monuments com -
prising the remnants of two terraced sanctuaries 
(A20, A21) and two cave hermitages (A19, A22), 
situated above the village of Kunjorowesi on the 
mountain’s northeastern slope (Fig. 10.2). One of 
the terraced structures (A20) appeared to cover 
an extensive area and will be discussed in more 
detail below. Another highlight was the rediscov -
ery of a monument first reported by H.L. Leydie 
Melville in 1915 and subsequently labelled no. V 
in Stutterheim’s registry.7 Lying on the slope of 
7. Reported by N.J. Krom in Oudheidkundig Verslag  
1915: 2.
Fig. 10.2: Site A19. Cave hermitage on the northeastern 
slope of Mt Penanggungan. (Photo: Hadi Sidomulyo)the minor peak named Sarahklopo in the south-
west, this impressive structure (A45) formerly 
comprised a series of terraces crowned by three 
substantial altars containing niches. Curiously, 
the monument was not recorded during any of 
the expeditions conducted in the latter half of 
the 20th century.
Lastly, mention should be made of the site 
named Watu Tulis (A49) on the hill of Bekel, 
Penanggungan’s northwestern satellite (Fig. 10.3). 
This can likewise be considered a rediscovery, as its 
existence was already known to the expeditionary 
team led by Maulana Ibrahim in 1991–1992. At that 
time, however, the team members apparently did 
not include a specialist in epigraphy, hence the 
vague report of a rock inscription displaying ‘two 
lines of unidentifiable script’ (Maulana Ibrahim et 
al. 1991–1992: 54). Upon reaching the location in 
December 2012, however, there was no doubting 
that the inscribed characters were Old Javanese, 
including a date in figures which indicated the 
Śaka year 1312 (1390–1391 CE).8 Upon further in -
vestigation it turned out that the enormous boulder 
upon which the inscription was carved had once 
formed the roof of a cave hermitage, long since 
buried under a landslide.
It should be added that the survey of 2012 was 
able to clarify once and for all two former cases of 
mistaken identity. The sites which are today pop-
ularly labelled KAMA 1 (A31) and KAMA 4 (A12) 
were in fact already registered by Stutterheim and 
appear on van Romondt’s map as numbers XLV 
and LXIX respectively (Figs. 10.4, 10.5).9 
2013
Exploration continued with an additional nine -
teen sites recorded, seven of which could be 
8. The final cipher is rather weathered, allowing for a 
possible alternative reading of 1311.
9. Confirmed by the photographs H-561 (Claire Holt 
collection) and OD-13027 (see fn. 10 below). KAMA is an 
acronym of Keluarga Mahasiswa Arkeologi, referring to 
the archaeology students from the University of Indonesia 
who conducted the 1983 survey (cf. Agus Aris Munandar et 
al. 1983: 26; Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1991–1992: 34–35; Agus 
Aris Munandar 1990: 78 [ tabel 1]). 
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   212 5/8/22   2:32 PM

--- [Page 221] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java213
Fig. 10.3: Site A49. Rock inscription ‘Watu Tulis’, on the northern slope of Mt Bekel. (Photo: Hadi Sidomulyo)
Fig. 10.4: Site A31 (Stutterheim XLV). Terraced monu-
ment on the western slope of Mt Penanggungan. (Photo: 
Hadi Sidomulyo, courtesy of the University of Surabaya)
Fig. 10.5: Site A12 (Stutterheim LXIX). Cave hermitage 
on the western slope of Mt Gajahmungkur. (Photo: Hadi 
Sidomulyo)
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   213 5/8/22   2:32 PM

--- [Page 222] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo214
positively identified with those discovered in the 
1930s. Crucial to this endeavour was the avail -
ability of eighty previously unpublished photo-  
graphs preserved in the library of the Universi -
ty of Leiden, kindly supplied by Marijke Klokke  
at the writer’s request.10 
As to new finds, the remains of an important 
monument (A63) were encountered on the summit 
of Kemuncup, while the hill of Bekel yielded two 
caves (A53, A58) and the foundations of a terraced 
sanctuary (A62) constructed from unworked 
stones. Lower down, at the foot of the mountain, 
discoveries included a collection of massive candi 
stones (B12) in the village of Wonosunyo (Gempol), 
as well as the remnants of a brick structure (B13) 
on the northern slope of the hill of Semodo at Ke-
dungudi (Trawas).11
By the end of this second year in the field the 
sites plotted began to exhibit a consistent pattern. 
It became apparent that the terraced sanctuaries 
on the upper slopes were invariably separated 
from the nearest settlements by at least an hour’s 
climb, regardless of the direction of approach. 
This curious fact prompted the decision to adopt 
a dual system of classification, namely A, rem -
nants of sanctuaries and cave hermitages situated 
at an elevation of 750 m and higher, and B, a less 
uniform group of remains, including bathing 
places, gateways, brick foundations etc., found 
scattered among the villages located lower down 
at the foot of the mountain.12 
10. These photographs are from the collection of the former 
Oudheidkundige Dienst (OD), as listed by J. Oey-Blom in 
van Romondt et al. 1951: 13.
11. It seems not impossible that these remains can be 
connected with the now vanished site numbered XXIV in 
Stutterheim’s registry, which according to van Romondt 
et al. (1951: 25–26) was located on the summit of the hill, 
about 100 m distant. An altar stone bearing the Śaka date 
1265 was said to originate from this same site. The stone is 
currently preserved in the Trowulan Museum (Mojokerto 
Museum no. 573). 
12. To what extent this system is justifiable in the long 
term remains to be seen, but for the time being it is useful 
inasmuch as it allows us to view the remains preserved on 
the mountain’s upper section as an homogenous unit, with 
a clearly defined boundary.2014
The survey of 2014 resulted in the documentation 
of ten more sites, two of which were among those 
registered by Stutterheim.13 Most spectacular was 
the discovery of two previously unreported cave 
hermitages (A74, A75) high up on Penanggungan’s 
northeastern slope (Figs. 10.6, 10.7). It turned out 
that they formed a group with a third cave (A19) 
discovered in 2012, all three lying at an elevation 
of ± 1,200 m and located 250 m from each other. 
More caves would be encountered nearby as the 
exploration progressed, raising the question of 
whether in former times a source of fresh water 
had existed in the vicinity.14 This would be a sig-  
 
13. One of these, no. II, had in fact been reported by  
Tjokro Sudjono et al. (1976: 13, No. 9), but wrongly labelled 
site LXVIII.
14. During the survey in 2014 water was, in fact, observed 
oozing from the rocks in a dry river bed located just 60 m 
from one of the caves. This phenomenon, however, still 
requires further investigation. 
Fig. 10.6: Site A74. Entrance to a cave hermitage on the 
northeastern slope of Mt Penanggungan. (Photo: Hadi 
Sidomulyo, courtesy of the University of Surabaya)
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   214 5/8/22   2:32 PM

--- [Page 223] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java215
nificant discovery in itself, as natural springs are 
virtually non-existent on Mt Penanggungan’s 
upper section.
2015 
There is no doubt that the year 2015 will be remem -
bered as a turning point in the history of research 
on Mt Penanggungan. Two devastating fires on 
the upper slopes, one in August and another in 
November, cleared virtually all of the vegetation 
surrounding the summit, allowing an unobstruct -
ed view of the archaeological remains lying above 
±1,000 m. Scattered across the landscape was a 
sophisticated network of embankments and re -
taining walls, interspersed with the remnants of 
ancient stairways and low-lying terraced founda-
tions, for the most part fashioned from unworked 
stones. This surprising spectacle at once rendered 
our carefully compiled inventory, as well as that 
of Stutterheim, quite obsolete. Confronted with 
the difficulty in establishing where one group of remains began and another ended, it was evident 
that truly accurate classification was still a long 
way off (Fig. 10.8).15 
The most extraordinary feature exposed by 
the fire was a broad ‘carriageway’ which encircled the mountain, ascending 600 m to the summit in the form of a spiral.
16 Varying from two to three 
metres in width, the path was supported by strong 
retaining walls designed to last for centuries. Par-
ticularly impressive were the solid embankments 
constructed from piled up stones, enabling safe 
passage across the numerous ravines on Penang-
15. To note just one example, a series of remains on the 
mountain’s western slope originally numbered XLVII, 
XLVIII and IL, comprising two terraced structures and a 
cave hermitage, turned out to represent a single complex covering an area of no less than 4,000 m².
16. The existence of this carriageway (jalur kereta) has 
long been known to the mountain’s local inhabitants, who 
offer a variety of fanciful explanations for its origin and 
purpose. 
Fig. 10.7: Site A75. Cave hermitage on the northeastern slope of Mt Penanggungan. (Photo: Hadi 
Sidomulyo, courtesy of the University of Surabaya)
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   215 5/8/22   2:32 PM

--- [Page 224] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo216
Fig. 10.8: Mt Penanggungan; surface of the western slope following the fire of 2015. (Photo: 
Hadi Sidomulyo)
gungan’s upper slopes. Many of these structures 
remained intact. As to the original purpose of the 
carriageway, one can surmise that it served pri -
marily as a processional path to the mountain’s 
summit, as well as for the transport of supplies 
to the terraced sanctuaries and hermitages (Figs. 
10.9, 10.10).17 
As far as was possible to estimate, the survey of 
2015 counted eleven new additions, two of which 
could be identified positively with the monuments 
labelled IV and LXVIII by Stutterheim. The com-
plete list comprised seven terraced sanctuaries, one 
cave hermitage, three stone stairways and numer-
ous fragmentary remains (Fig. 10.11). Of particular 
interest was the discovery of an important monu-
ment (A76) on Penanggungan’s southern slope, an 
17. It should be added here that Mt Penanggungan and its 
four satellites possess an intricate network of ancient trails 
and footpaths, the mapping of which will doubtless help to 
shed light on the functions of the various monuments, as 
well as their relationship to one another.area which had in the past received little attention. 
During investigation of the site local villagers un-
covered close to three thousand Chinese copper 
coins (kepeng), a number of which were datable 
to the first quarter of the 15th century.18 
2016–2018
For the past three years attention has been concen -
trated on the above-mentioned carriageway and 
its offshoots; a task which has been greatly facili-
tated by the discovery of a hand-drawn map of Mt 
Penanggungan in the office for the Preservation of 
Cultural Heritage at Trowulan.19 Although undated, 
it appears to represent an earlier version of the map 
18. I am grateful to Lim Chen Sian of ISEAS – Yusof Ishak 
Institute, Singapore, for taking the trouble to examine a few 
random samples, all of which were found to date from the 
reign of the Ming emperor Yongle (1402–1424). 
19. The map is entitled Voorloopige Schetskaart der 
Oudheden op het Penanggoengan Gebergte, with reference 
to De Bouwk. Insp. B/D Oudheidkundigen Dienst.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   216 5/8/22   2:32 PM

--- [Page 225] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java217
Fig. 10.9: Mt Penanggungan; ‘processional path’ on the southeastern face (aerial view). (Photo courtesy 
of the University of Surabaya) 
Fig. 10.10: Mt Penanggungan; a strong retaining wall supports the principal carriageway. (Photo: Hadi 
Sidomulyo, courtesy of the University of Surabaya)
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   217 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 226] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo218
appended to van Romondt’s 1951 publication, and 
as such was probably drawn up in the 1940s. Of 
interest is the fact that the map not only reveals 
an uncertainty, even at that time, regarding the 
identification of some of the monuments, but it also 
shows that van Romondt and his colleagues were 
fully aware of the network of roads and pathways 
on the mountain. Curiously, however, their report 
makes no mention whatsoever of the processional 
path leading to the summit, despite the fact that it 
is marked clearly on the map, matching precisely 
our own GPS tracking data of 2015. Whatever the 
reason for this silence, the map itself has demon-
strated its value in the field, and has at least on 
one occasion been directly responsible for the 
rediscovery of a previously unconfirmed site in 
Stutterheim’s list.20 
20.  This is the site numbered LV, marked on van 
Romondt’s map without any further explanation in the text. Combining the map data with direct field ob-
servation, the following is a rough description of 
the principal carriageway on Mt Penanggungan. 
The path comprises three levels, each one separat-
ed from the next by a distance of between 300 m 
and 400 m. Starting from the site named Candi 
Sinta (A6), which occupies a strategic position 
in the northwest, the track ascends gradually in 
a clockwise direction (pradakṣiṇa), making two 
complete circuits of the mountain before reach -
ing the summit on the south side. Based on the 
ground surveys undertaken, it can be calculated 
that the pathway is approximately 6 km in length, 
displaying a consistent gradient of about one in 
twelve. This almost imperceptible incline would 
have posed no difficulty for wheeled vehicles drawn 
by horses or oxen in the past.
Turning now to the network of carriageways 
as a whole, it appears that its purpose extended far 
beyond mere ritual. Judging by the way in which 
the tracks intersect, divide and branch off, one 
can imagine that they were in constant use, both 
for communication and the delivery of supplies. 
Assuming, moreover, that these same pathways 
served to facilitate the work of numerous build-
ers and architects, their construction probably 
dates from the same period as that of the terraced 
monuments, which reached a peak in the 15th 
century. An additional, and perhaps not entirely 
unforeseen, benefit provided by the carriageways 
was the possibility for swift mobilization in the 
event of war. 
So far we have discussed conditions on the 
mountain above an elevation of about 1,000 m. 
Below that level the visible evidence becomes less 
certain, mainly because the landscape has altered 
drastically as a result of human activity. Transfor-
mation of land once covered by forest into farms 
and plantations makes it extremely difficult to 
identify the original points of entry with any con-
fidence. Yet some traces still remain. Observation 
in the field suggests that access to the lowest of the 
carriageways circling the mountain was by way 
Located below the summit of Sarahklopo on the western 
side of Mt Penanggungan, the visible remains point to a 
terraced sanctuary of considerable size. The site (A89) was 
visited and plotted in October 2017. 
Fig. 10.11: Remains of a former stairway (A83) on the 
southwestern slope of Mt Penanggungan, revealed by 
the fire of 2015. (Photo: Hadi Sidomulyo)
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   218 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 227] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java219
of long, zigzag paths which ascended gradually 
through the foothills.
It was during a field survey of the southeastern 
access in May 2017 that word was received of a great 
quantity of candi stones preserved near the hamlet 
of Guci.21 Upon investigating further, it turned out 
that the site in question (B17) displayed all the signs 
of a stonemasons’ open-air workshop at the foot of 
the mountain. Numerous rectangular stone blocks 
could be seen scattered across an area extending no 
less than 500 m from east to west. These were inter -
spersed with several larger stone items in varying 
stages of completion, among them a seated statue 
and makara spout, as well as an exceptionally large 
half-finished yoni pedestal measuring almost two 
metres in length. The remains had only recently 
become exposed following the conversion of the 
forest into farmland (ladang) and the cleared area 
was still covered with stone flakes, providing ev -
idence of the craftsmen’s activity centuries ago. 
Doubtless there was much more to be found hidden 
in the undergrowth. 
With regard to other significant discoveries in 
the period 2016–2018, two sites in particular should 
be mentioned. The first (A88) is situated in the east, 
high on the hill of Kemuncup. Lying just 100 m 
north of a terraced structure (A63) documented in 
2013, this monument features the bold image of a 
male figure riding an elephant, carved in relief on 
a large boulder. The fact that the rider wears the 
headdress known as tәkәs might provide a reason 
for an identification with the legendary hero Pañji 
(Fig. 10.12).
The second and most recent find on Mt Pen-
anggungan, in May 2018, originates from the site 
numbered A20, mentioned earlier. Situated at an 
elevation of a little over 1,000 m, this is the largest 
of three terraced sanctuaries forming a more or 
less straight line on the mountain’s northeastern 
slope. Upon first examining the remains in 2012 it 
21. This settlement belongs to the village of Kesiman in  
the district of Sukoreno, Pasuruan Regency. It lies directly 
below the hill named Bende, discovery site of an urn 
containing a large quantity of metal items, including eleven 
inscribed sheets of gold foil, all preserved in the National 
Museum, Jakarta (Inv. Nos. 6997–7030). For a description, 
see Jaarboek, Koninklijk Bataviaasch Genootschap van 
kunsten en wetenschappen VII (1940): 95–96.was impossible to gain a clear impression, mainly 
because the site was exceedingly overgrown and 
the steep terrain difficult to negotiate. Attention 
was drawn, however, to a few statue fragments, 
as well as some isolated reliefs displaying human 
figures, possibly representing part of a narrative.
Since then, the local caretakers have made 
efforts to determine the approximate size of the 
area by clearing the undergrowth, while ensuring 
the safety of any important items discovered in the 
process. The results have been both surprising and 
significant. According to the most recent estimate, 
site A20 measures no less than 5,000 m², making 
it effectively the largest known monument on Mt 
Penanggungan. Judging by some of the individ -
ual items recovered, such as roof tile fragments 
and numerous stone pillar supports of varying 
sizes, we can conclude that the site comprised a 
variety of structures, suggesting the presence of 
a religious community. Among the more signifi-
cant discoveries is what appears to be a naturalistic 
stone liṅga, as well as an inscribed stone bearing a 
date in figures, which would seem unequivocally 
to indicate the Śaka year 1271 (1349–1350 CE). This 
is the oldest date from the Majapahit period yet to 
be found on a structure from Mt Penanggungan, 
and as such provides convincing proof of building 
activity on the mountain’s upper slopes in the mid-
14th century (Fig. 10.13).
To sum up, the exploration of Mt Penang -
gungan conducted over the past seven years has 
contributed significantly to our knowledge of the 
historical legacy preserved on its slopes, with the 
current list of archaeological sites now totalling 
one hundred and seventeen (see Appendix 10.1). 
Of some sixty-seven monuments discussed or 
mapped by van Romondt and his colleagues in 
1951, fifty-three have been positively identified, 
with an additional five uncertainties. Together 
they comprise forty-five terraced sanctuaries and 
the remains of five additional structures, six cave 
hermitages, one bathing place and one decorated 
boulder. Further documentation includes seven -
teen sites reported during various expeditions 
in the past but not listed in the 1951 publication, 
among them eight terraced sanctuaries, four caves, 
one stone stairway, one miniature candi, as well 
as the important remains at Jedong, Belahan and 
Candi Pasetran. The remaining forty sites may be 
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   219 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 228] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo220
Fig. 10.12: Relief image at the entrance to site A88, on the summit of Mt Kemuncup. (Photo: 
Hadi Sidomulyo)
Fig. 10.13: Remnants of site A20 on Penanggungan’s northeastern 
slope, comprising a dated stone, damaged liṅga , relief ornament and 
pillar supports. (Photo: Hadi Sidomulyo)
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   220 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 229] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java221
regarded as new discoveries, or at least unpublished 
data, as follows: 
Terraced sanctuaries 17
Cave hermitages 12
Brick foundations 4
Stone stairways 3
Miscellaneous structures 2
Altar sites 1
Stonemasons’ workshop 1
To these can be added the following list of 
isolated objects, as well as the partial remains of 
structures whose precise function still needs to 
be determined: 
Stone terracing, retaining walls etc. 40
Concentrations of candi stones 12
Stone mortars (lumpang) 6
Miscellaneous stone items 8
This is not to mention the network of car -
riageways discussed earlier, along with countless 
ceramic and terracotta shards, ancient coins and 
other fragmentary evidence scattered over the 
mountain slopes. 
discussion
Taken as a whole, this substantial body of fresh 
information demands a re-examination of some 
of the popular assumptions inherited from an 
earlier generation of scholars, which has tended 
to confine discussion of the terraced sanctuar -
ies on Mt Penanggungan to the closing years of 
Majapahit. It would seem, in fact, that the entire 
theory connecting these monuments with a so-
called ‘re-emergence’ of ancient pre-Hindu beliefs 
needs to be reconsidered, or at least rephrased. 
Insofar as the evidence now points to the estab-
lishment of religious communities on the moun-
tain during Majapahit’s heyday in the mid-14th 
century, it might be more accurate to speak of a 
gradual embracing by royalty of local elements 
which formerly lay outside the sphere of court 
culture. These problems will be explored in more 
detail later on. 
It should not be forgotten, moreover, that the 
identification of Mt Penanggungan with the holy Mahāmeru was apparently well established at 
least three hundred years before the founding of 
Majapahit. An ornamental top piece originating 
from the 10th century bathing-place of Jolotundo 
(B1) on Penanggungan’s western foot provides 
clear evidence of this early association.22 It follows, 
therefore, that any serious study can hardly be 
considered complete without an investigation of 
the role played by the mountain in the broader 
context of pre-16th century East Javanese history. 
It is thus time to turn to the historical record. 
Despite the fact that more than eighty per cent 
of the relevant epigraphical data belongs to the age 
of Majapahit, there are nonetheless a few useful 
documents which have survived from the preced-
ing centuries. One important source of information 
is the so-called stele of Cuṅgraṅ, issued by King 
Pu Siṇḍok in the year 929 CE.23 Not only does this 
inscription contain the first known reference to 
Mt Penanggungan, but it also provides an insight 
into the East Javanese ruling family at the time. 
The contents concern the granting of sīma, or tax 
exempt status, to the residents of Cuṅgraṅ, specifi -
cally for the benefit of a sacred domain comprising 
a hermitage (saṅ hyaṅ dharmāśrama), ancestral 
shrine (saṅ hyaṅ prāsāda siluṅluṅ) and holy spring 
(saṅ hyaṅ tīrtha pañcuran) at Pavitra.
22.  See Stutterheim 1937: 214–250. This stone, which for-
merly served as a fountain, comprises nine liṅga shaped 
‘peaks’, encircled by a crowned serpent. As such, it may 
be viewed as a miniature representation of both Mt Pen -
anggungan, with its multiple summits, and the Mahāmeru, 
specifically in connection with the well-known episode of 
the ‘Churning of the ocean of milk’ (Samudramanthana), as 
depicted in the Viṣṇu and Matsya Purāṇa s (Zimmer 1946: 
105). It is interesting to find that the composition date of 
the Old Javanese Ādiparva (Juynboll 1906: 31–33), which 
preserves the same legend, corresponds almost precisely 
with the completion of the Jolotundo monument in 977–978. 
The popular legend of the transport of the Mahāmeru from 
India to Java, itself an adaptation of the Samudramanthana, 
could thus have been firmly established as an oral tradition 
before being committed to writing by the author(s) of the 
Tantu Paṅgәlaran (cf. Pigeaud 1924: 62–66).
23. Transcription in Krom 1913: 72–73 (Oud Javaansche 
Oorkonden XLI). A later copy of the same charter, inscribed 
on two copper plates and known as Cuṅgraṅ II, was tran-
scribed and discussed at some length by Stutterheim (1925: 
208–281). The plates are preserved today in the Catholic 
church at Kayutangan in the city of Malang.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   221 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 230] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo222
The former village of Cuṅgraṅ is identifiable 
with present-day Bulusari, which lies on the eastern 
foot of Mt Penanggungan in the district of Gempol 
(Pasuruan Regency).24 As to Pavitra, we know from 
later textual sources, such as Prapañca’s Deśavarṇa -
na and the anonymous Tantu Paṅgәlaran, that this 
is the name by which the mountain was known 
during the Hindu-Buddhist period. Considering the 
geographical position of Cuṅgraṅ, it seems probable 
that the sacred domain of the inscription is identi-
fiable today with the extensive archaeological site 
at Belahan (B8), which lies just 4 km southwest of 
Bulusari. The remains at Belahan, after all, display 
the vestiges of a former hermitage and Śaiva temple 
foundation, as well as a sacred bathing-place. It 
might even be this same site that received a visit 
from King Rājasanagara of Majapahit during the 
royal progress of 1359 CE, as recorded by Prapañca 
(Deśavarṇana 58.1). The poet reports that the king 
halted briefly at Cuṅgraṅ, before continuing on to 
‘a ṛṣi sanctuary on the slope of Mt Pawitra’.25 The 
purpose of the stop at Cuṅgraṅ, aside from ‘enjoy-
ing the scenery’, could well have been to examine 
the historic charter preserved in the village, before 
ascending to the hermitage. 
Turning now to the ancestral shrine (prāsāda 
siluṅluṅ) referred to in the inscription, we are 
informed that it was dedicated to a high-ranking 
member of the nobility entitled rakryān of Bawaṅ. 
Since this figure is described as the father (yayah) 
of Pu Siṇḍok’s queen Dyah Kәbi, it follows that 
he was none other than the king’s father-in-law.26 
24. The inscribed stone itself stands to this day in the 
hamlet (dusun) of Sukci, under Bulusari.
25. Translation follows Robson 1995: 66.
26. I note that the same conclusion was drawn by Pauline 
Lunsingh Scheurleer (2009: 192, note 15). In fact, it is possi-
ble to go a step further and propose an identification with 
the Rakryān Bavaṅ named Pu Uttara, who is listed among the highest-ranking officials in the charter of Barāhāśrama, 
issued by King Dakṣa sometime after the year 915 CE (Cohen 
Stuart 1875, no. XVII). A study of the inscriptional record 
shows that Pu Uttara’s son and successor, Dyah Sahasra (the 
brother of Siṇḍok’s queen Dyah Kәbi), was promoted to the 
exalted rank of rakai Halu in around 929, before holding 
the highest position under the king as rakai Hino in 934. 
His mother, the widow of Pu Uttara, apparently outlived 
her husband by more than a decade. Bearing the title of 
rakryān Kabayān, she appears as the recipient of a sīma The royal apanage of Bavaṅ was especially pres -
tigious during the first half of the 10th century, 
representing a geographical unit which appears to 
have encompassed the districts lying to the north 
and northwest of Mt Penanggungan. The choice 
of the mountain as a place of enshrinement for the 
rakryān Bavaṅ of the Cuṅgraṅ inscription was thus 
appropriate. It can be added that Pu Siṇḍok’s mar -
riage to the princess Dyah Kәbi served to ensure 
an increasingly prominent role in government for 
the East Javanese nobility, who probably encour-
aged the incorporation of local elements in the 
art and architecture of the period. The resulting 
emergence of a new style in the decades following 
finds its clearest expression in the terraced bathing 
place of Jolotundo. Despite the lack of concrete 
evidence, we find no reason to doubt that this im-
pressive monument was commissioned by one of 
Pu Siṇḍok’s immediate successors.
As noted above, the charter of Cuṅgraṅ is the 
oldest known document to mention the holy moun -
tain Pavitra. A still earlier inscription, however, was 
recovered from the archaeological site at Jedong 
(B5) on the northern foot of Mt Penanggungan. 
This is the so-called charter of Kambaṅ Śrī, which 
takes the form of a large stela currently preserved in 
the museum at Trowulan (Mojokerto Museum no. 
402). The surface of the stone is badly weathered, 
but a partial transcription of the Old Javanese text 
reveals two separate edicts, labelled Kambaṅ Śrī A 
and B.27 The first bears a date equivalent to 926 CE, 
thus placing it within the reign of the Matarām 
King Dyah Tuloḍoṅ, who succeeded Pu Dakṣa in 
around 919. Kambaṅ Śrī B, on the other hand, is 
undated, but there are indications that it was issued 
at some time in 928–929.28 
grant in the 939 charter of Ālasantan (Abu Sidik Wibowo 
1979: 3–50).
27. Published in Krom 1913: 49–50, Oud Javaansche 
Oorkonden XXXIII, and Damais 1955: 138–140. The latter 
noted that Kambaṅ Śrī, the only place name clearly visible 
in the text, was not necessarily the subject of the charter; an 
observation supported by the current position of a village 
named Kembangsri on the banks of the river Porong, some 
4 km north of Jedong. Damais further discovered a reference 
to a bhaṭāra i parhyaṅan i Maṅgabuddhi (?), which indicates 
the presence of a sacred place of worship. 
28. The text is too fragmentary to allow any certainty, 
but the fact that it refers to Pu Siṇḍok as rakryān mapatih 
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   222 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 231] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java223
In fact, the position of the date on the stone 
(lines 30–31 recto) allows room for yet another, 
even earlier inscription, as noted by Jan Wisseman 
Christie some years ago.29 Observing ‘similari -
ties in textual structure’ with the stele of Hariñjiṅ 
(from Kediri), which preserves three individual 
but related edicts dated 804, 921 and 927, the 
same writer suggested that the Kambaṅ Śrī charter 
might follow the same pattern.30 As to which ruler 
was responsible for bestowing the original grant 
upon the community at Jedong, we have reason 
to favour the King Dyah Balituṅ (r. 898–c. 910). It 
was this royal figure, after all, who can be credited 
with initiating the process which culminated in 
the shift of the royal seat of power from central 
to eastern Java, and the establishment of a new 
capital by Pu Siṇḍok in the year 929.
On the basis of information gleaned from the 
907 charter of Mantyāsih, it is generally accepted 
that Dyah Balituṅ ascended the throne on the 
strength of his marriage to a princess of Matarām.31 
The origins of this king, however, have until now 
remained obscure. Attempts in the past to identify 
the former location of Vatukura, Balituṅ’s apanage 
title, have resulted in some rather speculative sug -
gestions which do not inspire much confidence.32 
An examination of the toponyms occurring in the 
Vatukura charter of 902, on the other hand, would 
seem to point unequivocally to a district lying on 
the southern bank of the Surabaya River in the East 
suggests that this figure had not yet succeeded to the  
throne. If such was the case, Kambaṅ Śrī B must have  
been inscribed before 20 April 929, the date of the first 
charter issued by Siṇḍok as an independent sovereign. 
29. Wisseman Christie 2004, III: 200. This argument is 
based on the fact that it was customary for the date to occupy 
the opening line(s) in Old Javanese inscriptions.
30. Wisseman Christie 2004, III: 200. For a transcription 
and discussion of the stele of Hariñjiṅ, see Sukarto 
Kartoatmodjo 1985: 47–65.
31. Cf. Stutterheim 1927: 179; Boechari 2012: 90–91.
32. See, for instance, Rouffaer 1921: 132; Poerbatjaraka 1933: 
514–516. Both scholars proposed locations on the southern 
coast of Java, respectively in the regencies of Pacitan and 
Purworejo. Aside from a lack of concrete evidence to support 
these claims, the districts themselves seem altogether too 
remote for serious consideration. Javanese regency of Sidoarjo.33 If this identification 
is correct, it places the site of Vatukura in the heart 
of the ancient land of Jaṅgala, and as such explains 
how, in just a few years, Dyah Balituṅ was able 
to establish sovereignty over an area extending 
eastward as far as present day Malang.34 
Aside from the Vatukura charter, which con-
cerns the maintenance of a royal ancestral shrine 
(dharma paṅasthulan), two more inscriptions 
issued by Dyah Balituṅ are known to originate 
from the region of Sidoarjo. Both were recovered 
from Mt Penanggungan, to where they had proba -
bly been removed to safety during the closing years 
of Majapahit. One is of particular interest in the 
context of the present discussion, as it was found 
in the village of Jedong. Apparently copied from 
an original during the Majapahit period, this single 
copper plate, dated Śaka 832 (910 CE), refers to a 
land grant made by the king to the inhabitants of 
Tulaṅan. In view of the discovery site of the in -
scription, it can be assumed that the place referred 
to is the present village of Tulangan, a former river 
port of some importance located just 10 km north 
of Jedong.35 The information supplied above thus 
supports the conjecture that the ancient settlement 
of Jedong itself was likewise established as a sīma  
33. The Vatukura inscription, consisting of five copper 
plates forming part of the Danish ‘Klampenborg collection’, 
was published with a Dutch translation by F.H. van Naerssen 
in 1941 (pp. 82–105). It represents a copy of one of Dyah 
Balituṅ’s original edicts, reissued in 1348 during the reign 
of the queen Tribhuvana Vijayottuṅgadevī of Majapahit. 
With regard to the toponyms occurring in the inscription, at 
least three are found to correspond with the present villages 
of Babadan, Boharan and Bareng near Krian (Sidoarjo), a 
district which has yielded significant archaeological remains. 
According to Prapañca (Deśavarṇana 77.1c), Vatukura was 
the site of a Buddhist Bajradhara establishment in the 14th 
century (Robson 1995: 80). 
34. The surviving inscriptional evidence further suggests 
that this policy of expansion was achieved through a peace -
ful integration of the eastern regions within the greater 
Javanese realm, rather than an aggressive campaign aimed 
at annexation by the court of Matarām; a likelihood which 
lends further support to Balituṅ’s East Javanese ancestry. 
35. Tulaṅan is listed among the ferry crossings on a tribu-
tary of the Surabaya River in the inscription of Caṅgu, issued 
by King Rājasanagara of Majapahit in 1358. Cf. Pigeaud 
1960–1963 I: 110 (Va: 3). 
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   223 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 232] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo224
domain by Dyah Balituṅ at the beginning of the 
10th century.
Having ventured about as far into the past as 
the available data permit, it is now time to examine 
some of the myths connecting the early monu -
ments on Mt Penanggungan with the famous King 
Airlaṅga (r. 1019–c. 1050). Much of this material 
owes its origin to G.P. Rouffaer, whose creative 
imagination has helped considerably to establish 
Airlaṅga’s mythical presence on the mountain.36 
Despite an almost complete lack of authentic doc-
umentation, these popular assumptions have since 
become so deeply ingrained in the local body of 
tradition that they have, to use the words of Th. 
Resink (1968: 2), ‘become unassailable’. 
Beginning with the remains at Belahan, men-
tioned earlier in connection with Pu Siṇḍok’s in-
scription of Cuṅgraṅ, the relationship with Airlaṅ -
ga has from the outset rested upon the premise that 
the principal ornament at the ancient bathing place 
was a stone image of Viṣṇu on Garuḍa, flanked 
by a pair of goddesses. Now that it has become 
increasingly apparent that this was not the case, 
the entire theory loses its foundation, and thereby 
its credibility.37
A more extreme example of misrepresentation 
is to be found on the opposite side of Mt Pen -
anggungan at the bathing place of Jolotundo. The 
mythical association of this site with Airlaṅga 
has here become so firmly entrenched that it is 
unequivocally acknowledged by the Indonesian 
Ministry of Culture. It has apparently escaped the 
attention of all but a handful of academics that the 
Śaka date 899 (977–978 CE), inscribed on the rear 
wall of the bathing place, predates Airlaṅga’s birth 
by more than two decades.38
36. See, for example, Notulen van de algemeene en bestu-
ursvergaderingen van het Bataviaasch genootschap van 
kunsten en wetenschappen 47 (1909): 180–185.
37. Aside from various technical objections, as well as 
the fact that the statue has been fashioned from a pecu -
liar reddish stone which is not to be found at Belahan, the 
proposed placement can be rejected on stylistic grounds, 
as argued convincingly by Lunsingh Scheurleer (2009: 
190–198).
38. It should be added that attempts by an earlier genera-
tion of scholars, notably J.L. Moens (1950) and F.D.K. Bosch 
(1961), to establish a connection between Jolotundo and 
Airlaṅga’s Balinese father Śrī Dharmodayana are equally Yet another fantasy is the one regarding Mt 
Penanggungan as the discovery site of Airlaṅga’s 
1041 inscription of Pucaṅan, popularly referred to 
as the ‘Calcutta Stone’. Once again, the origin of 
this supposed connection can be traced back to 
Rouffaer, whose identification of Pucaṅan with one 
of Penanggungan’s minor summits was apparently 
accepted without question by scholars such as H. 
Kern and N.J. Krom, despite the absence of any 
official report describing the circumstances of the 
stone’s discovery.39 
The single authentic document linking Mt 
Penanggungan with the King Airlaṅga, albeit in-
directly, is the copper plate inscription of Tәrәp, 
dating from 1032.40 Recovered from an unspecified 
location on the mountain, this royal charter con-
cerns the granting of sīma status to the inhabitants 
of Tәrәp at the request of the king’s brother, the 
rakai of Paṅkaja.41 The sambhanda, or ‘reason’ for 
the charter’s existence, is especially valuable for 
its reference to a number of important historical 
events, among them the invasion of the royal palace 
at Vvatan Mas, which forced Airlaṅga to flee to 
unconvincing. Aside from the fact that Dharmodayana 
himself had barely reached the age of about seven at the 
time of the monument’s completion, the inscriptional record 
shows that even in later years his official status was no more 
than that of prince consort to the reigning queen in Bali, 
Guṇapriyadharmapatnī, who was a direct descendant of 
Pu Siṇḍok. It thus seems more likely that the bathing place 
was constructed on the order of one of the queen’s Javanese 
forbears. 
39. See for example the article by Kern (1917: 83–114), ‘De 
steen van den berg Pĕnanggungan (Surabaya), thans in ‘t 
Indian Museum te Calcutta’. Looking at the available ev -
idence, it seems more likely that the stele of Pucaṅan was 
originally located further west, quite possibly in the regency 
of either Jombang or Lamongan, where the majority of 
inscriptions from the reign of Airlaṅga have been found. 
There is in fact a hill named Pucaṅan in the district of Kudu 
(Jombang), which overlooks an archaeological site long as-
sociated by tradition with this same historical period. A visit 
to the region is recorded in the journal of Colin Mackenzie, 
who was responsible for the stone’s acquisition during his 
brief sojourn in East Java between February and April 1812 
(cf. Weatherbee 1978: 67–68). 
40. Transcription in Boechari 1985–1986: 160–164.
41. The prestigious administrative unit (vatәk) of Paṅkaja 
apparently comprised an extensive tract of land to the north 
and west of Mt Penanggungan, in the present regencies of 
Sidoarjo and Mojokerto.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   224 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 233] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java225
the safety of Patakan. Unfortunately, the descrip-
tion is too vague to allow any certainty about the 
location of the palace in question. The position of 
Tәrәp itself, however, can be determined with some 
confidence, as it is described as belonging to the 
village of Kambaṅ Śrī, a name attached to the stone 
inscription from Jedong discussed earlier. The sīma  
foundation must therefore have been situated on 
the northern foot of Mt Penanggungan, where it 
is perhaps identifiable today with the settlement of 
Ngetrep at Sedati, in the district of Ngoro.42 
To sum up, despite the paucity of evidence to 
connect Airlaṅga directly with any of the known 
monuments on Mt Penanggungan, there is none-
theless a well-established local tradition claiming 
the king’s presence on the mountain, which should 
perhaps not be attributed entirely to the specula-
tions of early 20th-century scholars. One literary 
source offering a possible historical foundation 
for this tradition is Mpu Kaṇva’s Arjunavivāha, 
which has for long been regarded as an allusion 
to the life of Airlaṅga.43 The penance performed 
on the mountain Indraparvata by the Pāṇḍava 
hero Arjuna, for the purpose of destroying the 
demon king Nivatakavaca, may be compared to 
Airlaṅga’s retirement to a forest hermitage prior 
to embarking on his mission to unite a divided 
kingdom.44 If Indraparvata is identifiable with the 
holy Mahāmeru, as argued convincingly by Suryo 
Supomo (1972: 289–290), it would seem not at 
all impossible, perhaps even likely, that the site 
of Airlaṅga’s hermitage lay on the slopes of Mt 
Penanggungan. 
With regard to the 12th and 13th centuries, a 
shortage of data recovered from the mountain 
makes it difficult to draw any firm conclusions. 
This period saw the centre of government shift  
to the interior of the island, first to the region of 
Kediri in the south, and later to the east of Mt Kawi 
(vetaniṅ kavi), where the palace of Siṅhasāri was 
established. The discovery of dated stones in the 
vicinity of Jedong and Jolotundo attests to contin -
42. The hamlet of Ngetrep has yielded some fragmentary 
archaeological remains which require further investigation.
43. For a synopsis of this kakavin, see Zoetmulder 1983: 
298–302.
44. Described in lines 8–15 of the Old Javanese portion of 
the Pucaṅan inscription (Kern 1917: 104).uing activity at those sites, while a cave entrance on 
the hill of Bekel preserves the earliest inscription 
yet discovered on Penanggungan’s upper slopes.45 
It is perhaps noteworthy that this last mentioned 
document was inscribed just two years before 
the King Sarveśvara II (Śṛṅgalañcana) of Kaḍiri 
established the sacred foundation at Palah (Candi 
Panataran) near present-day Blitar.46 The site of 
Palah was in later years to become the state temple 
of Majapahit, constructed as a replica of the holy 
Mahāmeru and presided over by hyaṅ Acalapati, 
the ‘Lord of the Mountain’.47
Aside from the fragmentary epigraphical 
data mentioned above, the area surrounding the 
foot of Mt Penanggungan preserves a number of 
massive objects carved from stone, all of which 
remain unfinished. The impression is one of an 
ambitious construction programme which was 
for some reason suddenly abandoned. As to the 
figure responsible for this project, a likely candidate 
would be the last of the Siṅhasāri kings, Kṛtanagara 
(r. 1268–1292), whose reign came to an abrupt 
end when his capital was conquered by a rival.48 
Among the remains worth noting is a gigantic 
image of the Buddha Akṣobhya, as well as three yoni 
pedestals of unusually large dimensions.49 Viewed 
in conjunction with the nearby Śaiva-Buddhist 
45. The stones from Jedong and Jolotundo, dated respec-
tively Śaka 1041 (1019–1020 CE) and Śaka 1168 (1246–1247 
CE), are preserved today in the Trowulan Museum (Mojo- 
kerto Museum nos. 547 and 469). The inscription above the 
entrance to the cave known as Gua Buyung (A24) displays 
the Śaka date 1117 (1195–1196 CE) in figures, accompanied 
by the words maharṣi guha (reading by Agus Aris Munan-
dar 1990: 86). 
46. The stele of Palah dates from Śaka 1119 (1197 CE). 
Transcription in Krom 1913, Oud Javaansche Oorkonden 
LXXIV. 
47. For a discussion of hyaṅ Acalapati, see Supomo 1972: 
290–292.
48. Kṛtanagara’s predilection for large scale statuary is well 
known, the most famous examples being the two colossal 
dvārapāla which formerly guarded the 13th-century palace 
of Siṅhasāri. Standing nearly four metres in height, these 
images are among the largest pieces of stone sculpture ever 
produced in Java.
49. One of these pedestals was discovered among the 
remains of the extensive stonemasons’ workshop (B17) referred to earlier in this article. For a discussion of 
Kṛtanagara’s special affinity for the Buddha Akṣobhya, see 
Hadi Sidomulyo 2011: 124–129.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   225 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 234] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo226
monument of Jajava (Candi Jawi), described by 
Prapañca (Deśavarṇana 56.1b) as ‘a pious work of 
King Kṛtanagara’, these scattered remains in the 
vicinity of Mt Penanggungan naturally invite us 
to speculate on the extent to which this monarch’s 
religio-political philosophy influenced, or even 
motivated, the building activity on the mountain 
in the following century. 
In order to answer this question it is necessary 
to review the contemporary inscriptional record, 
as well as examine a number of later works of lit-
erature, especially the Deśavarṇana and Pararaton, 
both of which allude to the Siṅhasāri period. These 
sources allow us to envisage an organized strategy 
aimed at the political and spiritual unification of 
the lands of Jaṅgala and Kaḍiri.50 The construction 
of fortifications at Caṅgu-lor by King Viṣṇuvard-
hana (d. 1268), followed by the planting of a bodhi  
tree (1281) and inauguration of the Akṣobhya image 
‘Joko Dolog’ (1289) at Trowulan by his successor 
Kṛtanagara, provide concrete evidence of this in-
itiative.51 Increased activity in the region of Mt 
Penanggungan may in turn be regarded as part 
of the same effort, the holy Pavitra serving as the 
exemplary symbol of unity. For this reason, pre-
sumably, the mountain was chosen as the backdrop 
for the temple at Jajava, itself designed as a place of 
worship for both the Śaiva and Buddhist commu-
nities.52 Viewed from this perspective, it is hardly 
surprising that the earliest known monument from 
50. In an earlier publication (Hadi Sidomulyo 2010: 101) 
I have already drawn attention to ‘the remarkably dense 
concentration of mid to late thirteenth century inscribed 
stones from the region of present-day Mojokerto’, indicating 
a marked shift of attention to the former region of Jaṅgala 
from about 1250 onwards.
51. The reference to Caṅgu-lor (later the river port of 
Majapahit) is found in Pararaton 18.8–9 (Brandes 1920: 
24). For a note on the connection between the bodhi tree 
and the ‘Joko Dolog’ image, see Hadi Sidomulyo 2014: 102 
(B.1: Fig. 8). 
52. These observations allow us to trace the origin of the 
religious doctrine expounded by the 14th-century court poet 
Mpu Tantular back to the figure of Kṛtanagara, who bore 
the epithet ‘Bhaṭāra Śiva-Buddha’. Tantular’s doctrine of 
unity is encapsulated in the famous phrase bhinneka tuṅgal 
ika tan hana dharma maṅrva, from the kakavin Sutasoma 
(139.5). For further discussion, see Kern 1888; Zoetmulder 
1983: 415–437.the Majapahit period on Penanggungan’s upper 
slopes dates from the reign of the queen Tribhu -
vana Vijayottuṅgadevī (1329–1350), Kṛtanagara’s 
granddaughter and spiritual successor. 
Entering the 14th century, the region of Mt 
Penanggungan has so far yielded very few archae-
ological remains datable to the reigns of the first two 
rulers of Majapahit. This is perhaps understandable 
when we consider the turbulent events which fol-
lowed the death of Kṛtanagara in May–June 1292, 
culminating in the Mongol invasion and defeat 
of the usurper Jayakatyәṅ. The evidence further 
suggests that the newly established court at Ma -
japahit was plagued by intrigues and rebellions, 
which only came to an end with the assassination of 
King Jayanagara in 1328. Leaving aside the complex 
political and social dynamics of this period, it is 
sufficient to observe a shift of attention back to 
the land of Kaḍiri. Whereas Kṛtanagara appears to 
have recognized in Mt Penanggungan a symbol par 
excellence for the ‘Lord of Mountains’, hyaṅ Girinā -
tha, this same mountain deity was later to become 
the principal object of worship at the temple of 
Palah, mentioned earlier (fn. 47). Archaeological 
evidence at the site suggests that expansion of the 
original complex was initiated by King Kṛtarājasa 
(1294–1309) and extended further by his son and 
successor Jayanagara.53 
The reign of the queen regent Tribhuvana Vi-
jayottuṅgadevī (1329–1350) may rightly be regard -
ed as the high point in the history of Majapahit. 
Almost immediately after ascending the throne 
she set about crushing rebellious elements with 
the help of the able minister Gajahmada. These 
harsher measures apparently went hand in hand 
with a wise policy of diplomacy, attested by a 
broad distribution of royal edicts in key areas.54 
53. This observation finds support from an inscribed 
pillar dated Śaka 1220 (1298–1299 CE), now preserved in 
the Panataran Museum, as well as the pair of dvārapāla 
guarding the entrance to the temple complex, both of which 
display the Śaka date 1242 (1320–1321 CE). Cf. Brandes 1901: 
15; Knebel 1908: 86. In later years, succeeding sovereigns 
made their own contributions to the temple. 
54. Examples are the charters of Gәnәṅ II (Damais 1955: 
81); Batur (Pigeaud 1960–1963, I: 113–114); Himad-Valaṇḍit 
(Muhammad Yamin 1962, II: 83–84), and the so-called 
charter of Palungan (Lely Endah Nurvita 2002). 
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   226 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 235] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java227
The fact that at least two of these charters concern 
ṛṣi establishments in the mountains suggests a 
continuation of the programme initiated by Kṛtan -
agara, the queen’s grandfather.55 Tribhuvana’s son 
and successor, Rājasanagara, likewise followed 
suit, visiting two prominent communities of 
ascetics during his eastern progress of 1359, the 
second of which was located on the mountain 
Pavitra.56 It is, in fact, at around this time that 
dated monuments begin to make their appearance 
on the upper slopes of Mt Penanggungan. Aside 
from the recently discovered site numbered A20, 
discussed earlier, we can mention the terraced 
sanctuary Candi Gajah (A14) on the minor summit 
of Gajahmungkur, where a relief image depicting 
a scene from the Arjunavivāha, dated Śaka 1282 
(1360–1361 CE), was observed by visitors in the 
last century.57 One could even speculate that the 
construction of this monument, which lies not far 
from site A20, was motivated by the royal visit a 
few months earlier.
Entering the later chapters of Majapahit history, 
we leave the literary works of Prapañca and Mpu 
Tantular behind, along with the lengthy royal 
charters which characterized the earlier period. 
In fact, from the 1360s onwards the inscriptional 
record from the court becomes increasingly frag-
mentary, and virtually disappears altogether after 
the year 1418. Although a few inscribed copper 
plates have survived from the last quarter of the 
14th century, we know of only three edicts issued by 
king Vikramavardhana during his thirty-year reign 
55. Kṛtanagara is known to have issued royal decrees 
pertaining to the regulation of religious communities, among 
them the 1269 Sarvadharma charter, as well as the undated 
Rajapatiguṇḍala. The latter was directed specifically to the 
ṛṣis, yogīśvaras and spiritual lords (devaguru) of the maṇḍala 
establishments, which had hitherto remained largely outside 
the sphere of court influence. For commentaries on these 
texts, see Pigeaud 1960–1963 IV: 360–367, 381–390.
56. Commenting on Rājasanagara’s journey to the forest 
hermitage at Sāgara, Suryo Supomo (1972: 295), following 
Pigeaud (1960–1963 IV: 99), suggested that the king was 
motivated in part by ‘a longing for spiritual guidance which 
was not given him by his court priests’. The visit to Pavitra 
is described in Prapañca’s Deśavarṇana, 32.2–34.2, 58.1 
(Robson 1995: 46–48, 66). See also fn. 25 above. 
57. Van Romondt et al. 1951: 23; Photo OD-12734. from 1389–1428.58 As to his daughter and successor, 
the queen Suhita (r. 1429–1446), there is not a single 
contemporary document confirming her existence, 
knowledge of her reign being confined solely to 
the text of the Pararaton. As a consequence, we 
are largely dependent upon foreign sources for an 
understanding of this period, backed up by the 
surviving archaeological remains.
In the cultural sphere, native Javanese elements 
become increasingly prominent in the fields of 
architecture, literature, and the visual arts, while 
narratives belonging to the literary genre known 
as kiduṅ start appearing alongside kakavin in the 
form of relief carving on brick and stone monu -
ments. On Mt Penanggungan, a growing number of 
terraced sanctuaries and cave hermitages likewise 
tend to exhibit distinctly local characteristics, ex-
pressing what Stutterheim (1936: 29) described as a 
‘combination of early indigenous ancestor-worship 
with Hinduistic beliefs.’
These observations bring us back to the ques-
tion raised earlier, concerning the so-called revival 
of ancient, pre-Hindu religion during the late 
East Javanese period. Although a decline in direct 
contact with the Indian subcontinent might offer 
a partial explanation, I am rather more inclined to 
consider the growing prestige of the religious estab -
lishments in the countryside, notably the maṇḍala, 
which served as repositories of local wisdom and 
oral tradition. As relations between the maṇḍala  
and the centre of power grew closer during the 
14th century, one can surmise that an increasing 
number of indigenous cultural elements began to 
find concrete expression under royal patronage, 
eventually becoming formally incorporated within 
the hieratic art of the court.59 
58. These comprise the undated copper plate of Satyapura 
(Boechari 1985–1986: 100–101) and the charters of Patapan 
I and II (Van Stein Callenfels 1918: 171; Boechari 1985–
1986: 88–89). Although Patapan I dates from 1385, before 
Vikramavardhana ascended the throne, there is good reason 
to believe that the extant copy (present whereabouts?) is a 
re-issue from the year 1418, thus coinciding with the date 
of Patapan II.
59. The finely carved series of narrative relief panels 
adorning the walls of the so-called ‘pendopo terrace’ at 
Panataran, dated Śaka 1297, provides a pertinent example of 
the process described above. For a summary of the contents 
of the reliefs, see Satyawati Suleiman 1980.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   227 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 236] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo228
Returning now to Penanggungan, another point 
made by Stutterheim (1936: 29) when summarizing 
his exploration of the mountain concerned the 
possibility that the terraced sanctuaries ‘were con-
nected with the worship of deified kings, queens 
and gurus belonging to the later dynasties.’ It is cer -
tainly noteworthy that quite a number of inscribed 
dates discovered among the ruins on the moun -
tain’s upper slopes appear to match those marking 
significant events recorded in the Pararaton. This 
curious correspondence becomes especially notice -
able in the second half of the 15th century, raising 
the possibility that Mt Penanggungan became a 
preferred place of enshrinement for the later rulers 
of Majapahit and their families. The following are 
a few examples:
Śaka 1373 (1451–1452) 
Death of Kṛtavijaya and accession of Śrī Rāja-
savardhana (Pararaton 32.8 –10)
Date on the entrance steps to site A46 
Śaka 1378 (1456–1457)
Accession to the throne of Śrī Girīśavardhana, Hyaṅ 
Pūrvaviśeṣa (Pararaton 32.15–16) 
Dated stone from site A36. Stone displaying a 
chronogram from site B5 
Śaka 1386 (1464–1465)
Death of the queen Jayavardhanī, Bhre Daha 
(Pararaton 32.18)  
Dated stone from site A37
Śaka 1388 (1466–1467)
Deaths of Śrī Girīśavardhana and Śrī Vijayendudevī 
(Pararaton 32.18 –20)
Accession of Śrī Siṅhavikramavardhana (Pararaton 
32.21 –2)
Dated stone from site A6 
Śaka 1400 (1478–1479)
Death of Śrī Siṅhavikramavardhana in the kraton 
of Majapahit (Pararaton 32.24 –25) 
Dated stone from site A56 
While it is still too early to draw any certain 
conclusions, these observations clearly warrant 
further investigation. One could begin, for example, 
by searching for corresponding dates on the ap -
proximately fifty documented stones recovered 
from the former Majapahit capital. As noted in a 
previous article (Hadi Sidomulyo 2014: 108), dated stones at Trowulan begin to make their appearance 
shortly after the year 1350.  This period would have 
seen the passing of Majapahit’s first generation, 
of whom the Rājapatnī was the most well-known 
figure. The fact that the dates recorded are distrib-
uted evenly over a period spanning five generations, 
supports the likelihood that at least a few of them 
once represented shrines dedicated to deceased 
royal family members.
To conclude, despite the fall of the palace of 
Majapahit in the last quarter of the 15th century, 
terraced sanctuaries continued to be construct -
ed on Mt Penanggungan. Five inscribed stones 
recovered from the mountain’s northern slope 
bear dates spanning the period 1486–1512, while 
further incomplete fragments point to the same 
period, or perhaps even later. According to the 
Babad ing Sangkala, a Javanese court chronicle 
deemed trustworthy by historians such as H.J. De 
Graaf and M.C. Ricklefs, it was not until the year 
1543 that the sacred mountain Penanggungan was 
finally abandoned, its inhabitants capitulating to 
the forces of the Islamic Sultanate of Demak.60 
afterword
The exploration of Mt Penanggungan is an ongoing 
process. In the course of preparing this chapter 
I have on several occasions found it necessary to 
update the information gathered in the field, and 
even while typing this final section there are still 
more additions to be made. During the month 
of October 2018 yet another extensive fire swept 
across the northern slope of the mountain, re -
vealing no less than four hitherto undocumented 
terraced sanctuaries, one impressive cave hermit-
age and the fragmentary remains of numerous 
unidentifiable foundations. Field conditions in 
the weeks following, moreover, allowed the pos-
sibility to continue the survey of the principal 
‘carriageway’, which had ended abruptly almost 
three years earlier.61 
60. Graaf and Pigeaud 1985: 64–66; Ricklefs 1993: 2, 261 
(note 6); 1998: 213–214.
61. A sudden accident on the mountain, suffered by the 
writer in January 2016, coupled with unfavourable weather 
throughout the following year, effectively put an end to 
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   228 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 237] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java229
These recent expeditions have led to fresh in-
sights, as well as raised important questions which 
need to be explored further. Of particular interest 
are the long access paths, or ‘stairways’, construct -
ed from unworked stones and extending for several 
hundred metres below some of the monuments. 
The significant point here is that these pathways are 
in many cases intersected by the wider carriageway, 
implying that the former, most of which appear 
to provide access to less sophisticated structures, 
belong to an historical period predating the Ma-
japahit era. This, in turn, opens the possibility that 
the more elaborate sites from the 14th and 15th 
centuries simply represent the final phase of an 
ongoing construction programme which stretches 
back to the dawn of history. 
As a final word, I would like to emphasize that, 
despite a number of significant discoveries, the 
surveys undertaken on Mt Penanggungan during 
the last seven years have done little more than 
literally ‘scratch the surface’. This fact became 
plainly apparent in the month of July 2018, when a 
team from the East Java office for the Preservation 
of Cultural Heritage conducted the first ever 
excavation (to my knowledge) on the mountain’s 
upper slopes.62 The site chosen was the terraced 
structure labelled A1 (Candi Selokelir), itself  
the subject of some of the earliest photographs  
further exploration of the carriageway until conditions 
improved.
62. While it is true that a number of monuments on 
Mt Penanggungan were restored by the Archaeological 
Service during the 1930s, there is no record of any systematic 
excavation at that time. from Penanggungan taken by the Archaeological 
Service in 1915.
The results were astounding, for the excavation 
revealed that virtually the entire monument as 
witnessed today, excluding the entrance steps and 
lowest retaining wall, was no more than an arbi-
trary reconstruction by the local inhabitants, thus 
rendering earlier assessments of the site largely 
irrelevant. As it turns out, much of the original 
structure remains buried beneath the earth, pro-
viding an excellent opportunity for archaeologists 
to determine the monument’s original form and 
dimensions. 
This initial excavation offers on the one hand an 
exciting glimpse of the possibilities lying ahead, but 
at the same time presents a formidable challenge. 
If Mt Penanggungan’s 40 km² archaeological land-
scape is to be preserved for posterity, a clear and 
united vision based on firm scientific principles will 
be necessary to ensure long term benefits. This in 
turn will require a concerted effort by specialists 
in the fields of history, archaeology, epigraphy, art 
and architecture, as well as Old Javanese language 
and literature. It is sincerely hoped that the new 
data presented in this chapter will serve towards 
that end by eliciting an active response from the 
international academic community.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   229 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 238] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo230
Appendix 10.1 
Table 10.1
MT PENANGGUNGAN – List of Archaeological Sites 
(provisional)
A Description and local name LocationRoman 
numeralŚaka date(s)
A1 Terraced monument
Candi SelokelirSarahklopo, SW slope XXIII 1356, 1364 13.., 
1346?
A2 Terraced monument
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 4463Sarahklopo, SW slope
A3 Terraced monument
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 5Bekel, NW slope
A4 Terraced monument
Candi KendalisodoBekel, NW slope LXV
A5 Terraced monument
Candi SadelBekel, SE slope LXVI
A6
(a-b)Terraced monument
Candi Sinta, Candi GentongPenanggungan, NW slope XVII 1385, 1388
A7 Terraced monument
Candi PuraPenanggungan, NW slope LVII
A8 Terraced monument
Candi PutriPenanggungan, NW slope LVI
A9 Terraced monument
Candi BayiPenanggungan, NW slope XV
A10 Terraced monument
Candi Umpak WoluPenanggungan, N slope LXXXI
A11 Terraced monument
Candi GriyaGajahmungkur, NW slope XX
A12 Cave hermitage
Gua RanteGajahmungkur, W slope LXIX
A13 Terraced monument
Candi WayangGajahmungkur, S foot VIII
A14 Terraced monument
Candi GajahGajahmungkur, SW slope XXII 1282
63. These numbers refer to the map ( Peta tata letak candi ) appended to the publication of 1991–1992.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   230 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 239] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java231
A Description and local name LocationRoman 
numeralŚaka date(s)
A15 Terraced monument
Candi DharmawangsaGajahmungkur, S summit XIX
A16 Terraced monument
Candi KerajaanGajahmungkur, E slope III 136.
A17 Stone stairway
Agus Aris Munandar 1990: 104–105Gajahmungkur, SE slope
A18 Terraced monument
Candi BhutoGajahmungkur, S foot IX
A19 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, NE slope
A20 Terraced monument Penanggungan, NE slope 1271
A21 Terraced monument Penanggungan, NE slope
A22 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, E slope
A23 Stone altar
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 8Bekel, NW slope XXXV? 1371?
A24 Cave hermitage, Altar
Gua BuyungBekel, NW slope LXIII 1117, 1326
A25 Cave hermitage, Monolith
Gua KursiBekel, NW slope XXXIV? 1336?
A26 Terraced monument Bekel, NW slope LXII
A27 Terraced monument Bekel, NW slope LXI 1336
A28 Structural remains Penanggungan, Summit XI
A29 Cave hermitage
Gua WidodarenPenanggungan, W slope LXXX
A30 Cave hermitage
Gua BotolPenanggungan, W slope X
A31 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope XLV 131.?
A32 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope XLVI
A33 Terraced monument
Candi WisnuPenanggungan, W slope IL 1358
A34 Terraced monument
Candi GuruPenanggungan, W slope L
A35 Terraced monument
Candi SiwaPenanggungan, W slope LI
A36 Terraced monument
Candi LurahPenanggungan, W slope LII 1378, 1391
1380?
A37 Terraced monument
Candi CarikPenanggungan, W slope I 1386, 1380?
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   231 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 240] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo232
A Description and local name LocationRoman 
numeralŚaka date(s)
A38 Terraced monument
Candi NagaPenanggungan, W slope XVI
A39 Terraced monument Penanggungan, N slope LXXVI
A40 Terraced monument
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 40Penanggungan, N slope 14..
A41 Terraced monument
Candi MerakPenanggungan, N slope LXVII 1433
A42 Terraced monument
Candi LemariPenanggungan, N slope LIX
A43 Terraced monument
Candi YudhaPenanggungan, N slope LX 1408
A44 Terraced monument
Candi PandawaPenanggungan, N slope LVIII
A45 Terraced monument Sarahklopo, SE slope V
A46 Terraced monument Bekel, NW slope LXIV 1373, 1334? 
A47 Structural remains Gajahmungkur, Saddle XVIII?
A48 Terraced monument
Tjokro Sudjono et al., No. II64Penanggungan, N slope
A49 Cave hermitage, Inscription
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 54Bekel, N slope 1312
A50 Terraced monument
Candi TrilukoPenanggungan, W slope LIII
A51 Terraced monument Bekel, W summit LXX
A52 Terraced monument Bekel, Saddle LXXV
A53 Cave hermitage Bekel, S slope
A54 Cave hermitage
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 47 Penanggungan, W slope
A55 Terraced monument
Candi MenaraGajahmungkur, NW slope XXI
A56 Terraced monument
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 43Gajahmungkur, N slope 140065
64. This site is plotted on the map appended to the 1976 publication by Tjokro Sudjono et al. The position is accurate, 
but the identification with the monument numbered II in Stutterheim’s registry is incorrect.
65. The placement of this dated stone at our site A56 must be regarded as tentative, as the precise spot where it was 
observed is not entirely clear. A photograph of the stone (printed upside down) is published in Tjokro Sudjono et al. 
1976: 16 (No. 16). 
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   232 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 241] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java233
A Description and local name LocationRoman 
numeralŚaka date(s)
A57 Terraced monument
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 45Sarahklopo, SW slope
A58 Cave hermitage Bekel, NW slope
A59 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope XLVII
A60 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, W slope XLVIII
A61 Terraced monument
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 46Sarahklopo, SW slope
A62 Terraced monument Bekel, E slope
A63 Terraced monument Kemuncup, S summit
A64 Cave hermitage
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 49Penanggungan, W slope
A65 Cave hermitage
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 48Penanggungan, W slope
A66 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope LIV
A67 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, NE slope
A68 3 stone altars Sarahklopo, W slope
A69 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope LIIa
A70 Terraced monument Penanggungan, NE slope LXXIX
A71 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, NE slope
A72 Cave hermitage Bekel, N slope
A73 Terraced monument Penanggungan, N slope II 1385
A74 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, NE slope
A75 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, NE slope
A76 Terraced monument Penanggungan, S slope
A77 Stone stairway Penanggungan, S slope
A78 Terraced monument Penanggungan, S slope
A79 Terraced monument Wangi, S slope IV
A80 Terraced monument Penanggungan, N slope LXVIII
A81 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope
A82 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope
A83 Stone stairway Penanggungan, SW slope
A84 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, N slope
A85 Stone stairway Penanggungan, N slope
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   233 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 242] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo234
A Description and local name LocationRoman 
numeralŚaka date(s)
A86 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope
A87 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, NE slope
A88 Terraced monument Kemuncup, N summit [1]362
A89 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope LV
A90 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope
A91 Terraced monument Penanggungan, W slope
A92 Terraced monument Penanggungan, NE slope
A93 Terraced monument Penanggungan, NW slope
A94 Terraced monument Penanggungan, NW slope
A95 Terraced monument Penanggungan, NW slope
A96 Cave hermitage Penanggungan, N slope
A97 Terraced monument Penanggungan, N slope
A98 Cave hermitage66Gajahmungkur, W slope VII 1421
B Description and local name LocationRoman 
numeralŚaka date(s)
B1 Bathing place
Pemandian JolotundoBiting (Seloliman) 
Trawas, Mojokerto  XVII 899
B2 Foundation, pillar supports
Suku DomasBalekambang (Seloliman) 
Trawas, MojokertoXII
B3 Decorated boulder
Watu GambarBalekambang (Seloliman) 
Trawas, MojokertoXIII
B4 Terraced monument, statue
Reco MacanBalekambang (Seloliman) 
Trawas, MojokertoXIV
B5a
(a-b)Ancient gateways
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 29Jedong (Wotanmasjedong) 
Ngoro, Mojokerto848, 1189 
1237, 1248 
1298, 1308 1350, 1378
B5b Cave, sacred spring
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 54Jedong (Wotanmasjedong) 
Ngoro, Mojokerto1041
B6 Brick temple structure
Candi Pasetran
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 28Jedong (Wotanmasjedong) 
Ngoro, Mojokerto
B7 Temple remains, lumpang ,
brick foundationJedong (Wotanmasjedong) 
Ngoro, Mojokerto  126.
66. Rediscovered in December 2020. The date 1421, initially read by de Casparis, seems not entirely certain.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   234 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 243] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java235
B Description and local name LocationRoman 
numeralŚaka date(s)
B8a Ancient bathing place 
Candi Belahan
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 38Belahan (Wonosunyo) Gempol, 
Pasuruan
B8b Gateways, temple foundation
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, Nos. 36, 37Belahan (Wonosunyo) Gempol, 
Pasuruan
B9 Brick remains, jaladwara Belahan (Wonosunyo) Gempol, 
Pasuruan
B10 Structural remains, candi  stones
Mbah WiyuGenting, Ngoro
Mojokerto
B11 Terraced monument, lumpang
Mbah SentonoGenting (Wotanmasjedong) 
Ngoro, Mojokerto  LXXXI?
B12 Brick structure, bathing place
Pemandian KilisuciBiting (Seloliman) 
Trawas, Mojokerto  
B13 Brick structure Mt Semodo (Kedungudi) 
Trawas, MojokertoXXIV? 1265
B14 Statue, candi  stones
Punden RecoWonosunyo 
Gempol, Pasuruan
B15 Miniature candi
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1992, No. 55Genting (Wotanmasjedong) 
Ngoro, Mojokerto  
B16 Brick structure, lumpang
Punden SelumpangDuyung 
Trawas, Mojokerto
B17 Stonemason’s workshop,
Unfinished yoni etc. Guci, Kesiman (Sukoreno) 
Prigen, Pasuruan
B18 Brick foundations
SumbersukoKedungudi, 
Trawas, Mojokerto
B19 Inscribed boulder Genting (Wotanmasjedong) 
Ngoro, Mojokerto  1245
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   235 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 244] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo236
Table 10.2
MT PENANGGUNGAN – The inscriptional evidence.   
Dated monuments in the framework of history
No. Description Śaka Date Kingdom/Reigning monarch References
Matarām
B5a Stele of 
Kambaṅ Śrī848 
(926–927)Rakai Sumba/Paṅkaja
dyah VavaDamais 1955: 138–140
Īśānavaṅsa
B1 Bathing place 899 
(977–978)Unknown descendant of Pu 
Siṇḍok Śrī ĪśānavikramaBosch 1915, No. 1753
Kaḍiri
B5b Inscribed stone 1041 
(1119–1120)Śrī Bāmeśvara Bosch 1915, No. 1696
A24 Cave entrance 1117 
(1195–1196)Śrī Sarveśvara II
(Śṛṅgalañcana)Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
36, 52
Siṅhasāri
– Inscribed stone from 
Biting1168
(1246–1247)Anuṣanātha? Bosch 1915, No. 1753
B5a Inscribed stone 1189 
(1267–1268)Śrī Jayaviṣṇuvardhana Bosch 1915, No. 1696
Majapahit
B5a Inscribed 
gateway1237 
(1315–1316)Śrī Jayanagara Bosch 1915, No. 169667
B19 Inscribed boulder 
from Genting1245
(1323–1324)Śrī Jayanagara Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
52
B5a Inscribed 
gateway1248 
(1326–1327)Śrī Jayanagara Bosch 1915, No. 1696
– Inscribed zodiac bowl 1253
(1331–1332)Śrī Tribhuvanavijayot-
tuṅgadevī Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
52
B13 Inscribed stone 1265 
(1343–1344)Śrī Tribhuvanavijayot-
tuṅgadevī Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
26, 52
B7 Stone lumpang 126. 
(1338–1348)Śrī Tribhuvanavijayot-
tuṅgadevī Hadi Sidomulyo, field 
observation 2015
A20 Terraced monument 1271 
(1349–1350)Śrī Tribhuvanavijayot-
tuṅgadevī Hadi Sidomulyo, field
observation 2018
A14 Terraced monument 1282 
(1360–1361)Śrī Rājasanagara Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
23, 52
B5a Inscribed stone 1298 
(1376–1377)Śrī Rājasanagara Bosch 1915, No. 1696
67. Uncertain. Bosch’s report is not corroborated by any other source known to the present writer.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   236 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 245] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java237
No. Description Śaka Date Kingdom/Reigning monarch References
B5a Inscribed 
gateway130868
(1386–1387)Śrī Rājasanagara Bosch 1915, No. 1696
A49 Cave hermitage 131269 
(1390–1391)Śrī Vikramavardhana Hadi Sidomulyo, field
observation 2013
A31 Terraced monument 131. 
(1388–1397)Śrī Vikramavardhana Hadi Sidomulyo, field
observation 2015
– Inscribed stone from 
Biting1319
(1397–1398)Śrī Vikramavardhana Bosch 1915, No. 1753
A24 Stone altar 1326 
(1404–1405)Śrī Vikramavardhana Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
37, 52
A46 Terraced monument 133470 
(1412–1413)Śrī Vikramavardhana Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
37, 52
A27 Terraced monument 1336 
(1414–1415)Śrī Vikramavardhana Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
36, 52
A25 Cave entrance 133671 
(1414–1415)Śrī Vikramavardhana Munandar 
1990: 85
– Inscribed stone 1340
(1418–1419)Śrī Vikramavardhana Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
52
– Inscribed stone 1344 
(1422–1423)Śrī Vikramavardhana Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
18, no. VI
A1 Terraced monument [1]34672 
(1424–1425)Śrī Vikramavardhana Damais 1957: 398
B5a Inscribed stone 1350 
(1428–1429)Śrī Vikramavardhana Damais 1957: 374 (Fig. 
14d), 396
A1 Terraced monument 1356 
(1434–1435)Devi Suhita Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
25, 52
A33 Terraced monument 1358 
(1436–1437) Devi Suhita Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
32 and Fig. 3873
A88 Terraced monument [1]362
(1440–1441)Devi Suhita Hadi Sidomulyo, field
observation 2020
68. Published sources consistently give this date as Śaka 1307, based on the chronogram brāhmaṇa nora kaya bhūmi. 
Since the word brāhmaṇa  has the value of eight, however, a reading of 1308 seems preferable.
69. Possibly to be read as 1311.
70. Uncertain reading.
71. Read as 1336 by Agus Aris Munandar, perhaps on the basis of an erroneous identification with Stutterheim’s site 
LXI (A27 above). The figure for the decade is extremely weathered, making the reading not completely certain.
72. This date, initially read as [1]356 (cf. van Romondt et al. 1951: 25), was questioned by Damais, who argued in favour 
of [1]346. The correct reading remains debatable.
73. The association of this dated stone with Stutterheim’s site LI (Candi Siwa) would appear to be incorrect. A photo -
graph taken by Claire Holt in 1936 (no. 569) makes it clear that the stone was recovered from site IL (Candi Wisnu), A33 
according to our inventory.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   237 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 246] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo238
No. Description Śaka Date Kingdom/Reigning monarch References
A1 Terraced monument 1364 
(1442–1443)Devi Suhita Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
25, 52
A16 Terraced monument 136. 
(1438–1448)Devi Suhita Hadi Sidomulyo, field 
observation 2014
A23? Stone altar 1371 
(1449–1450)Śrī Vijayaparākramavardhana 
dyah KṛtavijayaVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
26, no. XXXV
A46 Terraced monument 1373 
(1451–1452)Śrī Rājasavardhana 
Saṅ SinagaraVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
37, 52
B5a Inscribed stone 1378 
(1456–1457)Śrī Girīśavardhana 
Hyaṅ PūrvaviśeṣaBosch 1915, No. 1696
A36 Terraced monument 1378 
(1456–1457)Śrī Girīśavardhana 
Hyaṅ PūrvaviśeṣaVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
32, 52
A36 
or 37Terraced monument 1380 
(1458–1459)Śrī Girīśavardhana 
Hyaṅ PūrvaviśeṣaVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
52
A73 Terraced monument 1385 
(1463–1464)Śrī Girīśavardhana 
Hyaṅ PūrvaviśeṣaVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
18, 52
A6 Terraced monument 138574
(1463–1464)Śrī Girīśavardhana 
Hyaṅ PūrvaviśeṣaVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
22, 52
A37 Terraced monument 1386 
(1464–1465)Śrī Girīśavardhana 
Hyaṅ PūrvaviśeṣaVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
17, 52
A6 Terraced monument 1388 
(1466–1467)Śrī Siṅhavikramavardhana 
dyah SuraprabhāvaVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
22, 52
A36 Terraced monument 1391
(1469–1470)Śrī Siṅhavikramavardhana 
dyah SuraprabhāvaVan Romondt et al. 1951: 
22, 52
A56 Terraced monument 1400
(1478–1479)Śrī Siṅhavikramavardhana 
dyah SuraprabhāvaTjokro Sudjono et al., 1976: 
16 (No. 16)
A43 Terraced monument 1408
(1486–1487)Śrī Girīndravardhana
dyah Raṇavijaya Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
35, 52
– Inscribed stone 1409
(1487–1488)Śrī Girīndravardhana
dyah Raṇavijaya?Van Romondt et al. 1951: 44, 
52, no. LXXI
A98 Cave hermitage 1421
(1499–1500)? Van Romondt et al. 1951: 19, 
no. VII
A97? Terraced monument 1422
(1500–1501)? Van Romondt et al. 1951: 26, 
52, no. XXVI
A41 Terraced monument 1433
(1511–1512)Batara Vigiaja75Van Romondt et al. 1951: 
43, 52
74. This date has been read alternatively as 1386 (Krom in Oudheidkundig Verslag 1915: 4) and 1389 (Ichwani in van 
Romondt et al. 1951: 22). In our opinion the last figure represents a five.
75. This is the name of the reigning ‘heathen’ king of Java, as recorded in the Suma Oriental of Tome Pires (Cortesão 
1944: 230), compiled shortly after the fall of Malacca to the Portugese in 1511.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   238 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 247] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java239
Diagrams showing the distribution of archaeological sites on the upper slopes of Mt Penanggungan 
(Hadi Sidomulyo 2019–2020)
1. NW quadrant 
■ Terraced structures
 Cave hermitages
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   239 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 248] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo240
2. SW quadrant
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   240 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 249] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java241
3. NE quadrant
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   241 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 250] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo242
4. SE quadrant
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   242 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 251] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java243
References
Abu Sidik Wibowo. 1979. ‘Prasasti Ālasantan 
tahun 861 Śaka’, Majalah arkeologi Th. II,  
no. 3 (January): 3–51.
Agus Aris Munandar. 1990. Kegiatan keagamaan 
di Pawitra, gunung suci di Jawa Timur abad 
14-15. PhD dissertation.  Jakarta: Fakultas Sastra 
Universitas Indonesia.
Agus Aris Munandar, Gatot Ghautama Djulianto, 
and Yusmaini Eriawati. 1983. Laporan hasil 
survai kepurbakalaan Gunung Penanggungan 
dan sekitarnya. Jakarta: Fakultas Sastra Uni -
versitas Indonesia.
Boechari. 1985/1986. Prasasti koleksi Museum 
Nasional. Vol. 1. Jakarta: Proyek Pengembangan 
Museum Nasional.
. 2012. Melacak sejarah kuno Indonesia lewat 
prasasti. Jakarta: Gramedia.
Bosch, F.D.K. 1918. Inventaris der Hindoe-
oudheden op den grondslag van Dr. R.D.M. 
Verbeek’s Oudheden van Java. Tweede deel.  
Rapporten van den oudheidkundige dienst  
in Nederlandsch-Indië 1915. Weltevreden: 
Albrecht & Co./’s-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff.
. 1961. ‘The Old Javanese bathing-place 
Jalatuṇḍa. II. The Last of the Pāṇḍavas’, in 
F.D.K. Bosch (ed.), Selected Studies in Indone-
sian Archaeology, pp. 86–108. The Hague:  
M. Nijhoff.
Brandes, J.L.A. 1901. ‘Driemaandelijksch rapport 
over October, November en December’, 
Rapporten van de commissie in Nederlandsch-
Indië voor oudheidkundig onderzoek op Java en 
Madoera, pp. 5–17. Batavia: Albrecht & Co./’s-
Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff.
. 1920. Pararaton (Ken Arok) of het boek  
der koningen van Tumapĕl en van Majapahit. 
’s-Gravenhage: Bataviaasch Genootschap.
Broekveldt, F.L. 1904. ‘Mededeeling aan het 
Bataviaasch Genootshap’, Notulen van de 
algemeene en bestuursvergaderingen van 
het Bataviaasch genootschap van kunsten en 
wetenschappen 42: XXIII–XXVII.
Cohen Stuart, Abraham B. 1875. Kawi oorkonden  
in facsimile, met inleiding en transscriptie. 
Leiden: E.J. Brill.Cortesão, Armando (ed.). 1944. The Suma oriental 
of Tomé Pires. Vol. I/II: An account of the East, 
from the Red Sea to Japan, written in Malacca 
and India in 1512–1515, and the Book of Francisco 
Rodrigues, rutter of a voyage in the Red Sea, 
nautical rules, almanack and maps, written and 
drawn in the East before 1515. London: Hakluyt 
Society.
Damais, L.C. 1955. ‘Études d’epigraphie indo-
nésienne IV. Discussion de la date des 
inscriptions’, Bulletin de l’École française 
d’Extrême-Orient 47: 7–290.
. 1957. ‘Études javanaises I. Les tombes 
musulmanes datées de Tralaya’, Bulletin de  
l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 48: 353–416.
de Graaf, Hermanus J. and Theodoor G. Th. 
Pigeaud. 1985. Kerajaan-kerajaan Islam per-  
tama di Jawa. Kajian sejarah politik abad  
ke-15 dan ke-16. Jakarta: Grafitipers.
Hadi Sidomulyo. 2010. ‘From Kuṭa Rāja to Sin -
ghasāri: Towards a Revision of the Dynastic 
History of 13th century Java’, Archipel 80: 
106–114.
. 2011. ‘Kṛtanagara and the Resurrection of 
Mpu Bharāda’, Indonesia and the Malay World  
39/113: 123–142.
. 2014. ‘Gravestones and Candi Stones: Re-
flections on the Grave Complex of Troloyo’, 
Bulletin de l’École française d’Extrême-Orient 
99: 95–152.
Juynboll, Hendrik H. 1906. Ādiparwa, Oudjavaan-
sche prozageschrift, uitgegeven . ’s-Gravenhage: 
Martinus Nijhoff.
Kern, Johan H.K. 1888. ‘Over de vermenging van 
Çivaisme en Buddhisme op Java, naar aanleid-
ing van het Oudjavaansch gedicht Sutasoma’, 
Verslagen en mededeelingen der koninklijke 
akademie van wetenschappen, Afdeling Let -
terkunde, 3e reeks, deel V, pp. 8–48. 
. 1917. Verspreide geschriften VII. ’s-Graven -
hage: Martinus Nijhoff.
Knebel, J. 1908. ‘Beschrijving van de Hindoe-  
oudheden in de afdeeling Blitar (residentie 
Kediri)’, Rapporten van de commissie in Ned-
erlandsch-Indië voor oudheidkundig onderzoek 
op Java en Madoera, pp. 29–177.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   243 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 252] ---
Hadi Sidomulyo244
Krom, Nicolaas J. 1913. Oud-Javaansche oorkonden. 
Nagelaten transscripties van wijlen Dr. J.L.A. 
Brandes. Batavia: Albrecht & Co./’s-Graven -
hage: Martinus Nijhoff.
Lely Endah Nurvita. 2002. Prasasti Palungan 1252 
Śaka. MA thesis, Depok: Jurusan Arkeologi, 
Fakultas Ilmu Pengetahuan Budaya, Univer -
sitas Indonesia. 
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2009. ‘The Javanese 
statue of Garuḍa carrying Wiṣṇu and Candi 
Kiḍal’, Artibus Asiae 69/1: 189–218.
Maulana Ibrahim et al. 1991–1992. Laporan ke -
giatan penentuan batas wilayah cagar budaya 
dalam rangka penyelamatan situs Gunung 
Penanggungan dan sekitarnya. Jakarta: Badan 
Koordinasi Survey dan Penataan Nasional 
(BAKOSURTANAL), Direktorat Perlindun -
gan dan Pembinaan Peninggalan Sejarah dan 
Purbakala (DITLINBINJARAH), Lembaga 
Ilmu Pengetahuan Indonesia (LIPI).
Moens, J.L. 1950. ‘De stamboom van Erlangga’, 
Tijdschrift voor Indische taal-, land- en volk -
enkunde 84: 110–158.
Muhammad Yamin. 1962. Tatanegara Madjapahit, 
II. Jakarta: Prapanca.
van Naerssen, Frits H. 1941. Oudjavaansche 
oorkonden in Duitsche en Deensche verzam -
elingen. PhD dissertation, Leiden.
Pigeaud, Theodoor G. Th. 1924. De Tantu Pang -
gĕlaran. Een Oud-Javaansch prozageschrift,  
uitgegeven, vertaald en toegelicht.  ’s-Gravenha-
ge: Nederl. Boek- en Steendrukkerij voorheen 
H.L. Smits.
. 1960–1963. Java in the 14th century (5 vols.). 
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Poerbatjaraka. 1933. ‘Enkele oude plaatsnamen 
besproken’, Tijdschrift voor Indische taal-, land- 
en volkenkunde 73: 514–520. 
Resink, Th.A. 1968. ‘Bĕlahan or a Myth Dispelled’, 
Indonesia 6: 1–37.
Ricklefs, Merle C. 1993. War, Culture and Economy 
in Java, 1677–1726. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.
. 1998. The Seen and Unseen Worlds in Java, 
1726–1749. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press.Robson, Stuart O. 1995. Deśawarṇana (Nāga-  
rakṛtāgama) by Mpu Prapañca. Leiden: KITLV 
Press.
van Romondt, V.R. et al.  1951. Peninggalan-  
peninggalan purbakala di Gunung Penang -
gungan. Jakarta: Dinas Purbakala Republik 
Indonesia.
Rouffaer, Gerret P. 1909. Notulen van de algemeene 
en bestuursvergaderingen van het Bataviaasch 
genootschap van kunsten en wetenschappen 47: 
176–189.
. 1921. ‘Was Malaka emporium voor 1400 
A.D., genaamd Malajoer? En waar lag Woer-
awari, Mā-Hasin, Langka, Batoesawar?’, 
Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 
van Nederl.-Indië 77: 1–174.
Satyawati Suleiman. 1980. The Pendopo Terrace 
of Panataran. Jakarta: Proyek Penelitian 
Purbakala.
van Stein Callenfels, Pieter V. 1918. ‘Oorkonden van 
Trawoelan, No. IV’, Oudheidkundig Verslag, 
p. 171.
Stutterheim, Willem F. 1925. ‘Een oorkonde  
op koper uit het Singasarische’, Tijdschrift   
voor Indische taal-, land- en volkenkunde 65: 
208–281. 
. 1927. ‘Een belangrijke oorkonde uit de 
Kĕdoe’, Tijdschrift voor Indische taal-, land- en 
volkenkunde 67: 172–215. 
. 1936. ‘The Exploration of Mt Penanggun-
gan’, Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeo-  
logy 11: 25–30.
. 1937. ‘Het zinrijke waterwerk van Djala-
toeṇḍa’, Tijdschrift voor Indische taal-, land-  
en volkenkunde 77: 214–250.
Sukarto Kartoatmodjo, M.M. 1985. Sekitar masalah 
sejarah Kadiri Kuna (harijadi Kadiri). Kediri: 
Lembaga Javanologi, Universitas Kediri.
Suryo Supomo. 1972. ‘Lord of the Mountains in 
the Fourteenth Century Kakawin’, Bijdra -
gen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 128:  
281–297.
Tjokro Sudjono et al.  1976. ‘Laporan hasil survai 
kepurbakalaan di Gunung Penanggungan 
(Jawa Timur)’, Berita Penelitian Arkeologi  
no. 1: 1–21.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   244 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 253] ---
New Archaeological Data from Mt Penanggungan, East Java245
Verbeek, R.D.M. 1891. Oudheden van Java: lijst  
der voornaamste overblijfselen uit den Hindoet -
ijd op Java, met eene oudheidkundige kaart. 
Batavia: Landsdrukkerij/’s-Hage: Martinus 
Nijhoff.
Weatherbee, Donald E. 1978. ‘Raffles’ Sources for 
Traditional Javanese Historiography and the 
Mackenzie Collections’, Indonesia 26: 63–93.
Wisseman Christie, Jan. 2004. Register of the 
inscriptions of Java, Part III. Consultation 
Draft II.Zimmer, Heinrich R. 1946. Myths and Symbols  
in Indian Art and Civilization. New York:  
The Bollingen Library.
Zoetmulder, Petrus J. 1983. Kalangwan, Sastra  
Jawa Kuno selayang pandang. Jakarta: Djam -
batan.
Zollinger, H. 1846. ‘Het sijsteem des Ardjoe -
no’, Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië 8/1:  
133–143.
10_CreSouthV2_5P_22Jun22.indd   245 5/8/22   2:33 PM

--- [Page 254] ---
THE CONTRIBUTORS
Sonali Dhingra (BA and MPhil in History, 
Delhi University; MA in Ancient Indian History, 
Jawaharlal Nehru University) earned her doc -
torate in the History of Art and Architecture at 
Harvard University (2021), specializing in South and Southeast Asian Art. Her dissertation, ‘Cult 
and Colossus: Buddhist sculpture from Odisha 
in History and Memory (ca. eighth to twelfth 
centuries)’ considers the role of scale and mate-riality in the making and reception of devotional sculpture from Buddhist sites in Odisha. She was one of two recipients of the 2022 South Asia Art 
& Architecture Dissertation Prize, awarded by the 
South Asia Art Initiative, UC Berkeley. In 2021, she 
was awarded the ACLS/Robert H.N. Ho Family 
Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship in Buddhist Studies. She was also a curatorial assistant of the 
exhibition Dharma and Puṇ ya: Buddhist Ritual art 
of Nepal (2019), and guest curator for an exhibition 
on South Asia at the Davis Museum, Wellesley 
College (2018). 
Michel Gauvain is an associate researcher at 
the Italian School of East Asian Studies (ISEAS 
Kyoto), and is currently collaborating with the 
Department for the Ethnological Collections of the 
Vatican Museums. Previously, he has been ‘cultore 
della materia’ (instructor) and adjunct lecturer 
in East Asian Religions and Philosophies at the 
Department of the Italian Institute of Oriental 
Studies, Sapienza University of Rome. He holds a PhD in Civilizations, Cultures and Societies of Asia and Africa (Sapienza University of Rome), 
an MA in Religions (Buddhist Studies) (SOAS, 
University of London), and an MA in Buddhist 
Art: History and Conservation (The Courtauld 
Institute of Art, University of London). His main research interests include the history, doctrines, 
rituals and art of East Asian Esoteric Buddhism.
Hadi Sidomulyo is an independent writer and 
historian, focusing on Javanese history of the 
pre-colonial period. His years spent as consult -
ant to the Indonesian Department of Culture 
and Tourism, first in Yogyakarta (1986–1989), 
and later in Surabaya (1989–1994), stimulated a 
special interest in the field of historical topogra-
phy. Between 1998 and 2001 he made a ground 
survey of the route followed by the 14th century King Rājasanagara of Majapahit through eastern 
Java, as recorded in Prapañca’s Deśavarṇana. 
The results were later published under the title 
Napak Tilas Perjalanan Mpu Prapañca (2007). 
Since then he has written a series of articles dealing 
with various problematic aspects of early Java -
nese history, as well as conducted an ongoing 
exploration of the archaeological remains on Mt 
Penanggungan, a programme supported by the 
University of Surabaya (Ubaya). His latest publi-cation is a new edition of the Old Javanese Tantu Paṅgәlaran, prepared in collaboration with S.O. 
Robson (ISEAS, 2021).
Hudaya Kandahjaya, born in Bogor, Indone-
sia, is currently employed at the BDK America in Moraga, California, USA. He graduated from the 
Graduate Theological Union, Berkeley, in 2004 
with a PhD in Buddhist Studies. In addition to 
scholarly and literary study particularly on In -
donesian Buddhism, he has engaged in practical 
aspects of Buddhism. All these gear his interests in 
Buddhism, education, and theoretical and practical 
understanding of engaged Buddhism. 
11_ContributorsV2_4P_19Jun22.indd   246 18/6/22   3:56 PM

--- [Page 255] ---
The Contributors247
Roy E. Jordaan (1947–2019) was an independent 
scholar. A graduate of Leiden University, he 
obtained a PhD in medical anthropology in 
1985. Shortly thereafter, his main interest shifted 
to ancient Javanese history and culture. His 
publications include a reader of Dutch essays 
on the Prambanan temple complex, In Praise 
of Prambanan (KITLV, 1996), which was later 
translated and published as Memuji Prambanan 
(2009), the monograph The Mahārājas of the 
isles: The Śailendras and the problem of Śrīvijaya  
(with B.E. Colless;  Leiden University, 2009), 
and a number of articles in academic journals 
focusing on the art history and architecture of 
premodern Java.
Mimi Savitri (PhD SOAS, University of London, 
2015) is an Assistant Professor in the Archaeol -
ogy Department at Universitas Gadjah Mada, 
Yogyakarta, Indonesia. She teaches Old Javanese 
Epigraphy, Paleography, Landscape Archaeology, 
and Cultural Resource Management. Her main 
research interest is landscape archaeology, with 
a focus on Javanese landscape. 
Umakanta Mishra (PhD, JNU, 2006) is an Assistant Professor in Ravenshaw University, Cuttack. The author has been associated with 
various research projects, namely Boats of South 
Asia Project, Oxford University, 1996; Digital 
Temple Atlas of Odisha, Tubingen University, 
2002; and Religion and Development Research 
Program, Birmingham University, 2005–2006. 
His publications include Vajrayāna Buddhism: 
Study in Social Iconography, New Delhi, 2009. His 
main research interests are the religious landscape of early mediaeval South Asia and archaeology of 
early farming communities of Odisha.
Saran Suebsantiwongse was initially trained 
as an opera singer in Europe and USA, and took 
Master and PhD degrees in Sanskrit Studies at the 
University of Cambridge. Upon the completion 
of his dissertation, he was awarded the Dr Hettie Elgood Scholarship to study in the Postgraduate Diploma in Asian Art History at SOAS. His PhD 
dissertation focused on the Sāmrājyalakṣmīpīṭhikā , 
a compendium on kingship and tantric rituals 
from 16th century Vijayanagara. His research focuses on the material culture of South and 
Southeast Asia in connection with Sanskrit texts and epigraphy as well as on Hindu and Buddhist iconography in the premodern era. He currently works as a freelance art director for River Books and as an artistic advisor for the Royal Bangkok Symphony Orchestra.
Jeffrey Sundberg is an independent research-
er. His primary interest lies in Central Javanese 
history and religious culture, but his investigations 
into the background of the Śailendra sponsorship 
of Abhayagirivāsins have led to recent collater -
al publications on the Esoteric Buddhist monk 
Vajrabodhi (in collaboration with Rolf Giebel) 
and the dedication of a number of early Second Lambakaṇṇa kings to an esoteric Buddhism pro-moted at the Abhayagirivihāra in Rājarattha. In prior publications, he has addressed the gold-foil 
mantra unearthed on the Ratu Boko prominence, 
the dating of the Borobudur stūpa, and an evalua -
tion of the historical claims of the Old Sundanese 
Carita Parahyaṅan in light of the new dynastic 
data in the Vanua Tәṅah III inscription. 
11_ContributorsV2_4P_19Jun22.indd   247 18/6/22   3:56 PM

--- [Page 256] ---
Index
A
Abhayagiri, 29, 39–41, 47, 74–76Abhayagirivihāra, 2, 40, 74–76, 82–84, 91, 108, 
123
ācārya, 28, 31, 61ādhāra vedī, 60Aggabodhi, King, 39Airlaṅga, King, 182, 224, 225Akṣobhya, 2, 27, 30, 32–38, 42, 45–47, 94, 100, 
124, 225–226
Amitābha, 30, 32, 34–36, 45–46, 124amitavala (infinite power), 68Amoghapāśa, 1–2, 7–9, 16, 119
cultic associations of, 10–15funerary rites, and, 17–23
Amoghapāśahṛdayadhāraṇī, 12, 14–15Amoghavajra, 12, 30–31, 61–62, 64, 70, 97–99, 
103, 107, 109, 110, 124
Ānandagarbha, 99, 105, 123Anāthapiṇḍada/Anāthapiṇḍika, 65, 77animistic beliefs, trees and, 78–80Apadāna Commentary, 64–65Archaeological Heritage Preservation Office, 
Yogyakarta, 121–122
archaeological sites
Belahan, 209, 219, 222, 224, 235Mount Penanggungan, 3, 230–242
Archaeological Society, Yogyakarta, 56architectural change, 57‘Arjuna temple’, 140–141Arjunavivāha, 225, 227Asanpat inscription, 29Aśoka, 80Aśoka-grove, 158–161Aśokāvadāna, 80Aṣṭamahābhaya Avalokiteśvara, 14–15, 17–18aṣṭāṅga-mārga (Eightfold path), 60Avadānakalpalatā, 65
Avadānas, 66Avalokiteśvara, 7–10, 12, 14–18, 21, 31–32, 36, 
42–43, 98, 109–110, 119, 124
Avataṃsakasūtra, 45, 67
B
Babad ing Sangkala, 228Bālakāṇḍa, 149–150Bālaputradeva, 75Bali, 8, 12, 58, 95, 103, 113, 124
Baliadari, 151, 163
Balinese stuti, 58, 103
balustrade, 3, 57, 63, 86, 88, 145, 153, 168, 175, 
192–193, 201, 204–205
Bavarian State Museum of Ethnology, Munich, 
114
Beilin Museum, 98
Belahan, archaeological site, 209, 219, 222, 224, 
235
Bhadracarī, 41, 45, 66, 69Bhadrakalpa, 44bhagavats, 61, 68Bhaṭāra Śiva-Buddha, 126bhikṣu, 86, 88, 137, 140bhūdhara, 69Bhūmisaṃbhāra, 69–70
Bhūvācārya, 38
Bianhong, Javanese monk, 41, 62, 64, 69Bihar, 1, 7–8, 10, 12, 64, 96, 119Bimbisāra, King, 64Blue Annals, 28–29
Bodhigarbhālaṃkāralakṣadhāraṇī, 39–40
Bodhimaṇḍa (Bodhi shrine), origin of, 78–80, 
82
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   248 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 257] ---
Index249
bodhisattva, 1–2, 7–17, 23, 27, 29–38, 42, 45–47, 
98, 107, 109–110, 114, 124
name categories, and, 65–66
Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā, 65
Boechari, 58Boko, King, 75Borobudur, 2, 36, 41–42, 44–46, 48, 55, 69, 
86–88, 102
hidden foot, 56–58, 60–61numerical arrangement of, 61–64original scheme of, 56–61stūpa, comparison with, 59–61
‘boundary stones’, 101, 104, 106, 109Brahmā, 3, 119, 137, 145–146, 151, 158, 160, 162, 
168, 170–171, 174–175, 189–191, 201–202, 204–205
British Museum, The, 95, 98, 104, 115–117Buddha, 15, 17, 21, 28, 30–32, 34, 36–37, 44–47, 
58–59, 61–70, 74, 77–82, 84–87, 94, 102, 107, 110, 118, 120–121, 125–126
Buddha Akṣobhya, 2, 94, 225Buddha Amitābha, 36Buddhabhadra, 67Buddha Bhasmeśvaranirghoṣa, 126buddhacarita, 70buddha-circle, 61Buddhadharma, 45Buddhaguhya, 99Buddhakṣetra, 15Buddha Mahāvairocana, 2, 94Buddha, translation of fo, and, 68Buddha Vairocana, 30, 125Buddhavaṃsa, 79‘Buddha’s conduct’ (vuddhacarita), 66Buddhāvataṃsaka, 67, 68
Buddhism
Esoteric, 2, 27–31, 39–41, 45, 47, 48, 62, 122, 
124
Mahāyāna, 16, 75Mantranaya, 58Pali, 76Shingon, 30–31Tantric, 38, 58Vajrayāna, 16, 58, 75
Buddhist architecture, 2, 41, 58, 76, 78Buddhist Asia, 23Buddhist ‘diamond triangle’, 29Buddhist doctrine, 2, 23, 135Buddhist maṇḍala, 30, 41, 47–48
see also maṇḍala
Buddhist Pure Land, 15
Buḍur, 58
‘Burning Temple’, 76
C
caitya, ‘shrine’, 39–40, 45, 58, 65, 68, 194–195
see also stūpa
caityavandana (worship of caitya), 58–59
Caityavibhaṅgavinayoddhṛtasūtra, 69
Cakrasaṃvaratantra, 38
Cakravartin (universal overlord), 79‘Calcutta Stone’, 224Candanapāla, King, 29Caṇḍavajrapāṇi, 58, 75, 103
Candi Abang, 104
Candi Apit, 171
Candi Bayi, 230
Candi Belahan, 235Candi Bhuto, 231Candi Bongkol, 104–105Candi Borobudur, 180
see also Borobudur
Candi Brahmā, 189Candi Canggal, 180Candi Carik, 231Candi Dharmawangsa, 231Candi Gajah, 227, 230Candi Gentong, 230Candi Griya, 230Candi Guru, 231
Candi Jago, 8–10, 16
Candi Jawi, 226Candi Kalasan, 136–137, 202
see also Kalasan
Candi Kendalisodo, 230
Candi Kerajaan, 231
Candi Lemari, 232
Candi Loro Jonggrang, 3, 137
Candi Lurah, 231
Candi Menara, 232Candi Mendut, 42, 86–87, 89Candi Merak, 232Candi Naga, 232Candi Panataran, 146, 225, 227
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   249 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 258] ---
Index250
Candi Pandawa, 232
Candi Pasetran, 219, 234Candi Pawon, 76, 86–87, 89Candi Pembakaran, 2–3, 74–76, 82–85, 86, 91
bodhighara, as, 83–90historical background, 74–76
Candi Plaosan, 194–196Candi Prambanan, 134, 145, 147, 149, 153–154, 
156, 162–164, 179, 185, 187
see also Prambanan
Candi Pura, 230Candi Putri, 230Candi Sadel, 230Candi Selokelir, 209, 229–230Candi Sewu, 44, 195Candi Sinta, 218, 230Candi Śiva/Siwa, 189, 231, 237Candi Sojiwan, 194–195Candi Triluko, 232Candi Umpak Wolu, 230Candi Viṣṇu, 189Candi Wayang, 230Candi Wisnu, 231, 237Candi Yudha, 232Candrakīrti, 36Central Java, Esoteric Buddhism in, 41–47central square, in maṇḍala gridwork, 62charity, accumulations of, (dāna-saṃbhāra), 69Chihara, Daigoro, 57, 195circular terrace, 45, 57, 60–61, 63–64, 68clay stūpikā, 58–59
Clinton, Hillary, 179‘Conqueror of the Three Worlds’, 94Cosmic Mountain, 80Covesa Kalpa, 29‘Crystal Palace’, 173–174‘Crystal Temple’, 199Cullavagga, 77cultic associations, of Amoghapāśa, 10–15Cuṅgraṅ inscription, 221–222, 224
D
Daizong, Emperor, 31Dānapāla, 12, 98, 122, 124dāna-saṃbhāra (accumulations of charity), 69daśa kuśala, 59–60Daśaratha, King, 147–155, 161, 163–164Viśvāmitra visit, 152–154
death-related ritual, 7de Casparis, Johannes G., 69–70, 74–75, 138, 173, 
175–176, 234
Deśavarṇana, 58, 222–223, 226–227Descent from Trayastriṃśa, 60–61Descent of the Ganges, 170, 181, 192, 194Devānaṃpiyatissa, King, 81dge-ba bcu, 59dhāraṇī, 12, 16, 21, 30–31, 39–41, 47–48, 58, 75, 
99, 102–103, 109, 124
dharma, 12, 14, 20, 40, 58, 65, 69, 102, 113, 139, 
223
Dharmadhātu Vāgīśvara, 44Dharmagupta, 30–31dharmakāya-caitya ( caitya of the Dharma 
body), 58
dharmālokamukha, 69Dharmarakṣa, 68Dharmaśaṅkhasamādhi Mañjuśrī, 36–37, 44–45Dharma wheel, turning of, 65Dharmmottuṅgadeva, King, 75diamond throne (vajrāsana), 78, 82, 84
Dinas Purbakala Republik Indonesia, 210Divine Throne, 201Divyāvadāna, 67–68, 70, 80double miracle, 67Dummedha Jātaka, 79Dutch Indies Archaeological Service, 150, 
209–210
dvārapālas, 140dvitīyā vedī, 60Dyah Balituṅ, King, 223–224Dyah Kәbi, Queen, 222Dyah Lokapāla, King, 138–140Dyah Tuloḍoṅ, King, 222
E
Eastern Chin dynasty, 67Eightfold path (aṣṭāṅga-mārga), 60‘Eight Great Fears Saviour’, 14eight stūpas, 59, 61
enlightenment, 14, 35–36, 41, 45, 60–61, 64, 67, 
70, 74, 77–80, 82, 85–86, 171
Enlightenment throne, 79Esoteric Buddhism, 2, 27–31, 39–41, 45, 47–48, 
62, 122, 124
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   250 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 259] ---
Index251
Esoteric Buddhism in Mediaeval Maritime Asia: 
Networks of Masters, Texts, Icons, 1
eyes, categories of, 65–66
F
Faxian, monk, 74, 81Feng-xian temple, 39Five Continents Museum, Munich, 113–115Five faculties (pañcendriyāni), 60
Five powers (pañca balāni), 60
fo, and translation of Buddha, 68
Four awareness (catvāri smṛtyupasthāna), 60
Four renunciations (catvāri prahāṇani), 60Four spiritual powers (catvāri ṛddhipādā), 60funerary rites, 17–23
G
Gāgak Nāsir, 164
Gāgak Svāra, 150, 154, 164gaṇḍa, 67Gaṇḍavyūha, 41, 45, 65–70, 86, 88Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra, 15, 65, 67, 69–70Gaṇeśa, 27, 119
Gaṅgāvatāraṇa-liṅga, 192, 195–196, 202, 205
Ganges, River, 17Garbhadhātu maṇḍala, 30–32, 34, 36, 42, 47, 
62–64, 70
garbhagṛha, 170, 196, 201–204garbha (womb), 65–66‘garland of buddhas’, 68Garuḍa, 147, 224
generals of the yakṣas, 102–103, 110, 124–125
ghana, 68, 70Gobushinkan, 31Godaison Zuzō, 99gongde ju, 69
Grand Miracle, 60–61
Great compassion (mahākaruṇā), 60–61
‘Greatly Ferocious Spell, The’, 58, 103
gridwork, and maṇḍala construction, 62–64
Guardians of Time and Space, 171Guhyasamāja teachings, 28–29, 36–37, 122–123guṇagaṇa (multitude of virtues), 69–70HHanumān, 164, 175
Sītā, search for, 157–160
harmikā, 59–60, 79–80
Hevajratantra, 38, 47
hidden foot, at Borobudur, 56–58, 60–61Hikayat Sәri Rama (HSR), 150–152, 154–155, 158, 
161, 163–165
Hindu art, 1–3Hindu-Buddhist period, 58, 101, 111, 154, 167,  
222
Hindu doctrine, 135
Hinduism, 96
Hindu rites, 16, 21Hu, Empress, 39Huiguo, 62, 64, 99human sacrifice, 134
hungry ghosts (preta), 22
Hybrid Buddhist Sanskrit, 75
I
Ijzerman, J.W., 56, 170Ikṣvāku Dynasty, 79India, 1–3, 7–11, 15–18, 20–23, 27–31, 39, 41, 
44–45, 47–48, 64, 66, 78, 80–82, 85, 95–96, 99, 111, 118–121, 123, 135, 145, 149–150,  
155, 158, 163–164, 167–168, 171, 173–175, 180–181, 183, 188, 190, 197–202, 204, 221,  
224, 227
Indic Middle Ages, 27Indonesia, 3, 9, 12, 57–58, 104, 113, 121, 135, 145, 
164, 179, 209–210, 224
National Museum of, 104, 112, 124, 137–138, 
142, 168
Indonesian Archaeological Service, 172Indonesian Epigraphist Association, 104Indriyeśvara, 69–70
Indus Valley Civilization, 78
In Praise of Prambanan, 167
insight (vidarśanā-saṃbhāra), 69
International Symposium on Chandi 
Borobudur, 55, 57
Islam, 154
Islamic Sultanate, 228
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   251 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 260] ---
Index252
J
Jagannath temple, 31Jajpur Collectorate Museum, 32, 35Jambudvīpa, 61, 65–66
Janaka, 147, 155–156
Jātakas, 66Java, 1–4, 8–10, 16, 23, 27, 37, 39, 41–42, 44–45, 
47–48, 55–56, 58, 61, 64–66, 68–69, 74–76, 78, 82, 87, 90–91, 94–95, 101–102, 104–106, 108, 111–115, 117, 119–124, 134–140, 142–143, 
145–146, 149–150, 154–155, 158, 162–165,  
167, 170–174, 177, 179–180, 182–183, 186, 189, 191, 195–197, 199–200, 202, 205, 209, 
221–225, 227–229, 238
‘Javanisation’, 113–114Jeta Grove, 65Jetavana-Śrāvastī, 61
jeweled sanctum (ratnavyūha), 65
Jizō, cult of, 15jñāna-saṃbhāra (accumulations of knowledge), 
69
Jōjin, monk, 98
Jolotundo, bathing place, 209, 221–222, 224–225, 
234
Juruṅan inscription, 142
K
kabajradharan, 58Kailash, Mount, 192Kāla, 16, 85–87, 90, 136, 158, 160, 192, 202, 
204–205
Kālacakrayāna, 37
kalaś a, 34
Kalasan, 3, 134–137, 139–140, 142–143, 202
establishment of, 139–143
inscription, and, 135–137see also Candi Kalasan
Kālikā Purāṇa, 27Kaliṅga Bodhi Jātaka, 80
kalyāṇamitra, 66
Kandahjaya, Hudaya, 103
Kānyakubja-Sāṃkāśya, 61Kapilavastu, 61Kāraṇḍavyūhasūtra, 15Karmavibhaṅgasūtra, 58–61Kawi, Mount, 225Kawi script, 102, 106, 108Kayumvuṅan inscription, 64, 66, 68–70Kayuvaṅi, King, 184Kbal Spean, riverine site, 3, 167–168, 170, 174, 
184–192, 194–195, 198, 201, 205
Keśarī dynasty, 29Khmer, 1, 3, 100, 170, 172–173, 186, 188, 195, 198King of Eulogies of Vajragarbha-Trailokyavijaya, 
99
Kläring Collection, 112
knowledge (jñāna-saṃbhāra), 69
Koṇāgamana Buddha, 79
Koryŏ Dynasty, 98
Kriyāsaṅgraha, 106, 107Kṛtanagara, King, 41, 225–227Kṣemendra, 65Kṣitigarbha Bodhisattva, 15
Kūkai, Kōbō Daishi, 41, 99–100, 122
Kuśinagara, 61
kūṭāgāra, 45–46, 65–66, 68, 70
kūṭāgāra-prāsāda, 68
L
Lalitavistara, 41, 65–70, 79, 87
‘Laṅkāpura’, 195
lasso, interpretation of, 13–14, 16law of causation, 58lead-bronze plate, 58, 102, 109Lévi, Sylvain, 45, 59liṅga, 3, 167–168, 170–173, 186, 188–192, 194–201, 
205, 219–221
liṅga-pīṭhikā, 180
Liṅgapurāṇa, 170–171, 192, 197–198, 202
lion throne, 59Liu Sung dynasty, 67Lord of All Virtues, 68–70Lotus Sūtra, 45
Lu Xiang, 30
M
Mahada Copper Plates, 28Mahākāla temple, 17, 20, 38mahākaruṇā (Great compassion), 60–61Mahāmeru, Mount, 3, 209, 221, 225Mahānāga, King, 84
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   252 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 261] ---
Index253
Mahānāman, monk, 82
Mahāpadāna Suttanta, 80Mahāraudranāmahṛdaya, 58, 75Mahārisī Kali, sage-king, 163
mahāstūpa, 32–33, 76
Mahāvagga, 77Mahāvairocana, 2, 30–31, 40, 62, 94Mahāvairocanābhisambodhi, 36Mahāvairocanābhisambodhisūtra (MVS), 30–32, 
36–37, 41–42, 47–48, 62, 64, 70, 98
Mahāvaṃsa, 77, 80–81, 84, 181–182
Mahāvastu, 79
Mahāvihāra, 37, 76–77, 182
Mahāyakṣasenāpati, 58, 75, 103Mahāyāna Buddhism, 16, 75Maheśvara, 95–96, 105, 107–109, 113, 115, 117–118, 
120–121, 124–126
Maitreya, 30, 32, 34, 37, 43, 66
Majapahit, 3–4, 41, 209, 219, 221–223, 225–229, 
236
mālāmantra, 75
Mānasāra-śilpaśāstra, 139maṇḍala, 2, 27, 29–37, 39, 41–42, 44–48, 61–64, 
70, 96, 99–100, 103, 107, 111–112, 114, 118, 122, 125–126, 227
see also Buddhist maṇḍala
Mandara, Mount, 174, 200–201Mandodarī, Queen, 145–146, 151, 154–155, 158, 
160–162, 164
Maṅgalarāja, 23maṅilala dravya haji, 137, 143
Mañjuśrī, 10, 30, 32, 34, 36–37, 44–45, 66, 99, 
100, 103, 118
Mañjuśrīvāstuvidyāśāstra, 76, 78, 82, 91
Mantranaya Buddhism, 58Maritime Asia, 1–2, 9, 27, 29–30, 39, 41, 47–48Matarām, 138, 140, 170, 184, 199, 201, 222–223, 
236
Mәḍaṅ i Mamrati, 139Melville, H. Leydie, 145
Merapi, Mount, 74, 91, 200
merits (puṇya-saṃbhāra), 69
Meru, Mount, 45–46, 199–200Milk, Ocean of, 167, 170, 173–174, 181, 189, 190, 
197–199, 201–202, 204, 221
miniature candi, 184, 219
miniature stūpa, 17, 20, 59Ministry of Culture, Indonesia, 224Mohenjodaro, 78Mojokerto Museum, 214, 222, 225morality (śīla-saṃbhāra), 69
Mother Goddess, cult of, 78Mount Kailash, 192Mount Kawi, 225Mount Mahāmeru, 3, 209, 221, 225Mount Mandara, 174, 200–201Mount Merapi, 74, 91, 200
Mount Meru, 45–46, 199–200
Mount Pawitra, 209, 222
Mount Penanggungan, 209–210, 222–229
archaeological sites at, 3, 230–242
carriageway on, 215–217, 221, 228–229exploration of, 211–221
Mount Sumeru, 105, 124–125, 209
Mpu Kaṇva, 225
Mucalinda, 79, 85
Musée Guimet, 104
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 117
N
Nāgarī-script, 9
Nairañjanā-Magadha, 61
Nālandā Museum, 97Nandivarman II, 181, 199Nara National Museum, 98, 117Narasiṃhadeva, ruler, 9Nationaal Museum van Wereldculturen, 106,  
118
National Museum, New Delhi, 96
National Museum of Bangkok, 100–101, 168
National Museum of Ethnology, Leiden, 106, 
114, 117–118
National Museum of Indonesia, 104, 112, 124, 
134, 137–138, 168, 173, 219
Nāṭyaśāstra, 175Navakampa, 58, 103
nayaka, 140, 143
Newark Museum, 10
Nidānakathā, 79Ninefold Tremble, The, 58, 103Niṣpannayogāvalī, 8, 37, 44Nivatakavaca, demon king, 225Notulen, 113
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   253 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 262] ---
Index254
O
Ocean of Milk, 167, 170, 173–174, 181, 189, 190, 
197–199, 201–202, 204, 221
Odisha, 1–2, 7–18, 20–23, 42, 45–48, 96–97, 119
Esoteric Buddhism, as centre of, 27–41identification of, 27–29
Odisha State Museum, 39, 96Old Javanese, 2, 58, 91, 95, 101, 113, 134, 137–138, 
149, 170, 173–176, 195, 197, 199–200, 209, 212, 221–223, 225, 229
oṃ ye te svāhā, 58
P
Pag Sam Jon Zang, Tibetan text, 28–29Palah, temple of, 225–226Pali Buddhism, 76Pallava, 119, 171, 180–181, 183, 199paṃsukūlikas, 76Panaṅkaran, King, 108–109, 137, 140Panataran Musem, 226Pañcatathāgata system, 27, 29paṅkur, 137panti, 140–141Pararaton, 226–228Paraśurāmeśvara temple, 16parinirvāṇa, 21, 59–61Pārvatī, 95–96, 102–103, 200pāśa, 7, 14–15Patna Museum, 97Paümacariya, 164Pawitra, Mount, 209, 222Penanggungan, see Mount Penanggungan
Plaosan, 41, 44–48Prajña, 36, 38, 67, 69Prajñāpāramitā literature, 82, 99Prajñāpāramitānayasūtra, 36Prambanan, 3, 9, 47, 106, 108, 134–135, 137–140, 
142–143, 145–147, 149, 151, 153–154, 156, 162–165, 167–170, 187–196
establishment of, 139–143inscription, and, 137–139overview of, 171Rāma, descent and lineage, 147–152water feature at, 173–186, 197–205see also Candi Prambanan
Pramodavarddhanī, Princess, 67Prasenajit, King, 67Pratītyasamutpāda gāthā, 12preta (hungry ghosts), 22Pūjopakaraṇas, 40puṇya-saṃbhāra (merits), 69Pūrṇavarman, King, 183Pu Siṇḍok, King, 123, 221–224, 236
R
Rāhularuci, 31Raigō, 15Rājagṛha, 61, 64Rājarānī temple, 16Rājaratnākaraya, 181Rājasanagara, King, 222–223, 227, 236–237Rājgir (rājagṛha), 64Rakai Kayuvaṅi, see Dyah LokapālaRakai Panaraban, King, 108–109, 111, 124Rakai Pikatan, King, 139rakryān, 137, 222Rāma, 154–157, 163–164, 175
descent and lineage, at, 147–153
Rāmakīen, 155, 165Rāmāyaṇa, 3, 145–147, 149, 151–152, 154, 158, 160, 
163–164, 170, 173–176, 189, 197, 199–200
Rāmāyaṇa kakavin, 138, 149, 151, 160, 163Rāṇaka Vajranāga, 21raṅkaṅ, 140Ratnagiri Site Museum, 11, 20ratnavyūha (jeweled sanctum), 65Ratubaka inscription, 74–75Ratu Boko, 2, 41, 44, 74–76, 78, 82–83, 85, 91, 
108–111, 123–124, 172, 184–186, 189, 191, 195–198, 200
Rāvaṇa, 3, 145–147, 150, 153–155, 158, 161–165Rijksmuseum, 112, 153, 162Rin chen bzang po, 99Robson, Stuart, 163Royal Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences, 
106, 113
Ssacred word (śruta-saṃbhāra), 69Saddharmapuṇḍarīka-sūtra, 45Sādhanamālā, 8, 27, 36sahasraliṅga, 3, 167, 179, 186–192, 195–196, 198, 
205
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   254 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 263] ---
Index255
Śailendra Dynasty, 39, 41, 56, 75, 108, 119, 137, 
190, 196–197
Śailendravaṃśatilaka, 137
‘Śaiva-Śākta’, 16Śaivism, 39, 96, 109, 124, 170, 192Śākyamuni, 42, 45–46, 65–67Samādhirājasūtra, 69–70śamatha-saṃbhāra (tranquility), 69saṃbhāra, 69–70Samudramanthana, 174, 221Saṃvarodayānāmamaṇḍalopāyikā, 38saṅ ādimantri tama tritaya, 140saṅgha, 22–23, 137Saṅghadāsa, poet, 146Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan, 68, 70Sañjaya, King, 180Saṅ Rāja Śailendravaṃśatilaka, 137Sanskrit, 2, 9, 12, 14, 27, 31, 39, 67–70, 75–78, 80, 
82, 91, 95, 101–102, 105, 124, 134–136, 139, 168, 184, 187–188, 190–192, 195, 200, 209
Śāntigarbha, 69sapta bodhyaṅgāni (seven factors of 
enlightenment), 60
Saraha, 29Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṅgraha (STTS), 30–32, 
35–37, 40–42, 45–48, 75, 95–96, 98–99, 105–106, 123–124
Sarvavajrodaya, 105–106, 123Sarveśvara II, King, 225Śatrubhañja, King, 29Second World War, 108Selokelir, 209, 229–230Sena, King, 39, 76, 84Serat Kanda, 155shadow-puppetry, 87Shingon Buddhism, 30–31shizun, 68Shore Temple, 181Śikṣānanda, 67Sinclair, Iain, 8, 62, 106śīla-saṃbhāra (morality), 69Śilpa-prakāśa, 139śilpins, 140, 143sīma, 101–102, 104, 107, 139–140, 142–143, 
221–225
Sītā, 3, 145–147, 153, 175, 161–165, 175
birth and descent, 154–156Hanumān’s search for, 157–160svayaṃvara, 156–157
Śiva, 3, 41, 95–97, 102–103, 119, 124, 134, 137, 147, 
153–155, 157–158, 161–164, 167–168, 170–179, 184–186, 188–190, 192, 194, 197–198, 200–205
Śiva–Buddha cult, 41, 226Śivagaṅgā, 198–199, 201Śivagṛha inscription, 75, 134–135, 137–140, 142, 
173, 176, 196
Śivaliṅga, 168, 170, 188, 197Śiva Mahādeva, 186Snodgrass, Adrian, 79–80, 107Soehamir, 108Solar Dynasty of kings, 79Someśvaradeva, Prince, 28Song gaoseng zhuan, 30South Seas, islands of the, 69Śraddhākaravarman, 99Śrāvastī, 61, 65, 67–68śrīgarbha (illustrious womb), 65Śrīghana, 68–69Śrīghananātha, 68, 70Śrī Kumbhayoni, 75, 184–185, 195, 198Śrī Mahābodhi Temple, 83Śrī Mahābodhi tree, 78, 87Śrīvijaya, 8, 119, 190stūpa, 17, 20–23, 29, 31–34, 36, 39, 41, 45–46, 
57–60, 62–64, 68–70, 74, 77–81, 83–84, 91, 181–182, 191, 195–196, 200
Borobudur, comparison with, 59–61structure of, 60types of, 61see also caitya
stūpa of Descent, 60stūpa of Parinirvāṇa, 60stūpa of Preaching, 60stūpa of Reconciliation, 59, 61stūpa of Victor, 60stūpa-prāsāda, 64–68, 70stūpa tsa-tsa, 59stūpa, votive, 20–21, 23
stūpikā, 58–59Stutterheim, Willem F., 104, 146–147, 149–153, 
156–158, 160–161, 163–164, 210–216, 218, 221, 227–228, 232, 237
Śubhākarasiṃha, monk, 30–31, 122Sudhana, 41, 66, 86, 88sugataguṇagaṇa, 70Suhita, Queen, 227
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   255 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 264] ---
Index256
Sumeru, Mount, 105, 124–125, 209
Sūryavaṃśa, 79Sūryavarman I, King, 186, 190, 196Susiddhikarasūtra, 109, 122
Sūtra for Humane Kings, 99
Sūtra for Recitation Abridged from the 
Vajraśekhara Yoga, 99
‘Sūtra of the Great Dhāraṇī for Extinguishing 
the Five Heinous Sins’, 47
suvarṇavarṇa (golden colour), 58–59
svayaṃvara, 147, 155–157, 163
Synopsis of the Eighteen Assemblies in the 
Vajraśekhara Yoga, 97
T
Ṭakkirāja, 75, 105–106, 109, 124
Tang dynasty, 67
Tang period, 30
Tantric Buddhism, 38, 58
Tantu Paṅgәlaran, 209, 221–222Tārādevī, 136Tāranātha, 28–29, 105tavān, 137Tathāgata Buddha, 32
tathāgatabhūmi, 69
Tattvālokakarī, 105, 123‘Temple of Ash’, 74ten knowledges, 60ten virtues, 59, 60–61terrace, circular, 45, 57, 60–61, 63–64, 68Thousand-Armed Avalokiteśvara, 98Thousand Buddhas, abode of, 44
Three Jewels, 103, 125
throne of Enlightenment, 79–80tīrip, 137tīrtha, 3, 21, 139, 167, 173, 176–177, 179–180, 186, 
188–190, 197–199, 201, 205, 221
tīrthikas, 65Todaji temple, 39
Trailokyavijaya, 2, 38, 75, 94
iconography of, 95–101
Java, in, 101–126
tranquillity (śamatha-saṃbhāra), 69‘transference of merit’, 23Trapuṣa-bhallika, 68trees, and animistic beliefs, 78–80Tribhuvana Vijayottuṅgadevī, Queen, 223, 
226–227, 236
Triple Jewel, 75, 102–103
Tri Tәpusan inscription, 69Tropenmuseum, 90Trowulan Museum, 214, 222, 225tṛtīyā vedī, 60Tuṣita heaven, 65–66
U
Udayādityavarman II, King, 186, 190, 196Udayagiri stūpa, 27, 29–41, 47
Uḍumbara tree, 79umbrella pinnacle, 57UNESCO, 57universal overlord (Cakravartin), 79Universitas Gadjah Mada, 1University of Indonesia, 211–212Uṣṇīṣavijayādhāraṇī, 31Uttarapurāṇa, 146uttuṅgaśailasthaśūro (Hero abiding on 
mountain), 68
VVāgīśvara Mañjuśrī Dharmadhātu, 99, 100, 103, 
118
Vairocana, 27, 30–32, 34–37, 39–40, 42, 44–47, 
66, 105, 124–126
Vairocanābhisambodhi, 31, 96, 99Vaiśālī, 61vajra, 32, 34, 36–37, 39, 42, 45–46, 58, 61, 95, 98, 
102–103, 106, 108, 113–116, 119–120, 122–123, 125–126
Vajrabuddhi (aka Vajrabodhi), 30–31, 41, 61–62, 
99
vajra circle, 61Vajradhara, 36, 37, 47, 58Vajradharma, 35–36Vajradhātu maṇḍala, 30–32, 35, 44–47, 61–62, 
64, 99
Vajrahūṃkāra, 2, 94–95, 99, 106, 124vajralepa, 136vajra line, 61–62Vajramālātantra, 123Vajrapāṇi, 2, 28, 32, 34, 36–37, 39, 42, 58, 94, 99, 
102–103, 105, 110, 124–126
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   256 29/7/22   3:23 PM

--- [Page 265] ---
Index257
vajrāsana (diamond throne), 78, 82, 84
Vajrasattva, 2, 30–32, 35–37, 45–47, 94, 100Vajraśekharasūtra, 61Vajraśekhara Yoga, 97, 99, 109
Vajratīkṣṇa, 32, 35
Vajrayāna Buddhism, 16, 58, 75van Erp, Theodoor, 57, 60–61van Kinsbergen, 56, 112van Romondt, V.R., 210, 212, 214, 218–219, 
236–238
varabuddharūpa, 70
Varak, King, 184
Vārāṇasī, 61
Vāsudevahiṇḍi, 146Vayuku inscription, 139Veṇuvana, 30, 64–65Victoria and Albert Museum, 90
vidarśanā-saṃbhāra (accumulations of insight), 
69
vihāra, 28–30, 70, 104, 121, 137, 139
vinayamahāyānavidām, 137vipaśyanā, 69Virtual Museum of Images & Sounds, 88virtues, multitude of, (guṇagaṇa), 69–70
Vishnupad Temple, 8
Viṣṇu, 119, 137, 147, 153–154, 163, 168, 170–172, 
174–175, 181, 189–191, 198, 201–202, 204–205, 
209, 221, 224Viṣṇuvardhana, King, 226Viśukalpa, King, 28–29Viśvāmitra, 147, 149, 156
visit to Daśaratha’s court, 152–154
votive stūpa, 20–21, 23
vuddhacarita (‘Buddha’s conduct’), 66vyaktaliṅga, 170–171
W
water feature, at Prambanan, 173–186, 197–205
wheel-turning king, 61
womb (garbha), 65–66
Y
yakṣas, generals and, 102–103, 110, 124–125
Yama, 16, 105
yamakapātihāriya, 65, 67
yamakaprātihārya, 65, 67
Yijing, Chinese monk, 21, 58Yixing, 31yojana, 61Yongle, emperor, 216
Z
Zanning, 30
12_Index V2 _3P_29Jul22.indd   257 29/7/22   3:23 PM