--- [Page 1] ---
197 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
© 2012 Faculty of Humanities, University of IndonesiaARLO GRIFFITHS holds a doctorate in Indology from Leiden University (2004). He was 
professor of Sanskrit at Leiden University (2005–2008), and is professor of Southeast Asian 
History at the École française d’Extrême-Orient (French School of Asian Studies), posted at 
its Jakarta branch ofice, since 2008. In addition, he holds a position as adjunct professor in 
Indonesian Epigraphy at University of Indonesia since 2010. His research foci are the Sanskrit 
and vernacular language epigraphical sources of Southeast Asia, on the one hand, and Vedic 
(especially Atharvavedic) literature of India, on the other. Arlo Grifiths may be contacted at: 
arlo.grifiths@efeo.net.Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012): 197–214
Inscriptions of Sumatra
II. Short epigraphs in Old Javanese
ARLO GRIFFITHS
Abstract
This article documents the existence of inscriptions using Old Javanese language 
on the island of Sumatra, by editing three short epigraphs, the irst of which 
has previously been published but never satisfactorily interpreted, while the 
remaining two have not yet been published at all. However short these texts are 
in themselves, they raise interesting questions about the cultural, commercial, 
political, and linguistic connections between Java and Sumatra in ancient times.
Keywords
Old Javanese, Old Malay, Java, Sumatra, inscription, funerary monument, 
makara, saragi .
The two major literary languages of the Indonesian archipelago, Malay and 
Javanese, are associated – both factually and perceptually – with the two major 
islands Sumatra and Java. The earliest written records of Sumatra, taking the 
form of inscriptions on stone, are indeed in Malay, while the earliest written 
records in an indigenous language found in Java are indeed in Javanese.1 
Nevertheless, there are exceptions to this pattern of language distribution in 
the epigraphical record. The presence of a group of inscriptions in Old Malay 
originating from Central and West Java has drawn considerable scholarly 
attention;2 but the reverse phenomenon, the epigraphical use of Old Javanese 
1  Several colleagues have helped me access the inscriptions discussed here, or shared 
with me their views on problems of interpretation. I gladly acknowledge the help of Agus 
Widiatmoko, Annabel Gallop, Budi Istiawan, Marijke Klokke, Daniel Perret, Uri Tadmor, and 
Jan Wisseman Christie.
2 For a discussion of the historical signiicance of this group of inscriptions, and a 
complete listing of the relevant secondary literature, see Jordaan and Colless 2009: 194–199 

--- [Page 2] ---
198 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
on Sumatra, has hardly been investigated.3 In continuation of my research on 
the epigraphical record of Sumatra (to be) published elsewhere,4 the purpose 
of the present paper is to document the existence of the phenomenon, and in 
so doing to present to the academic world three inscr iptions, the irst of which 
has previously been published but never satisfactor ily interpreted, while 
the remaining two have not yet been published at all. It will be shown that 
no general explanation will be suficient to cover the diversity of historical 
scenarios leading to the presence of these artefacts on Sumatra.
1 Inscribed upright stone from West Sumatra
An inscription dating to about the period of Ādityavarman (fourteenth century 
ce), currently held in the shelter of inscriptions at Pagaruyung in regency 
(appendix B: “Śrīvijaya and the Old Malay inscriptions of Java”). See also  Grifiths Forthcoming 
a.
3 The inscription of Hujung Langit in Lampung, still unpublished, was initially 
considered to have been written in Old Javanese, but Louis-Charles Damais later showed 
(1962a) that it is written in Old Malay. One or two short inscriptions from Padang Lawas, in 
North Sumatra, have been misidentiied as being in Old Javanese. On this misidentiication, 
see Grifiths Forthcoming b.
4 My review article “Inscriptions of Sumatra: Further data on the epigraphy of the 
Musi and Batang Hari River Basins“ (Grifiths 2011) is hereby retroactively declared the 
irst instalment of this series of studies dealing with Sumatran epigraphy. See also Grifiths 
Forthcoming b.Figure 1. Inscription of Kapalo Bukit 
Gombak II (Photograph by Johannes 
Greger, Tanah Datar project, 2011).


--- [Page 3] ---
199 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
Tanah Datar, West Sumatra (Figure 1), and originally recovered from the 
site Kapalo Bukit Gombak not far from Pagaruyung, was listed as number 
28 in Krom’s “Inventory of the antiquities in the Padang Highlands” (1912: 
43). Krom there proposed the reading oṃ pagunnira tuma ṅguṅ kuḍavira , which 
was published again without signiicant differences the next year as number 
CXXV of Brandes’ Oud-Javaansche Oorkonden  (1913: 260). Neither Krom nor 
Brandes published a translation, or made any statement with regard to the 
language of the inscription. There are some studies of more recent years by 
Indonesian scholars, who have correctly observed that the language is Old 
Javanese. The scholars in question have proposed translations of the text, but 
here one notes a certain arbitrariness of interpretative choices.
Before discussing the problems of interpretation, let me irst offer my own 
reading, following international (Indological) norms for the transliteration 
of Indic script types5 and using the paper estampage I made in 2011 that 
has since entered the collection of the École française d’Extrême-Orient 
(EFEO) in Paris under inventory number n. 2010 (Figure 2).
5 The complaint of Dick van der Meij in his review (in Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde  166 [2012]: 337–340) of a recent publication of mine, where I followed these same 
norms, that I have done so “without explaining what these norms are” is symptomatic of a 
widespread reluctance among Indonesianists to view Indonesian data as part of a larger whole 
than the archipelago itself. Anybody who takes the effort to use google (keyword “IAST”) c an 
ind out what the norms for transliteration of Indic script types are. Following these norms 
means most notably that I use v and not w to represent the 29th consonantal akṣara of the Indic 
syllabary. This is a choice of transliteration, and has nothing to do with phonology, as the 
reviewer implies it should. (If phonology were the determining factor in the transliteration 
system, I would also be obliged to obliterate the difference between bh and b which is relevant 
in this inscription, as it is in most documents using Indic script types, from Afghanistan to Bali.) 
I furthermore represent the anusvāra /cecak  with the sign ṃ, which again presupposes nothing 
with regard to the way this sign was actually pronounced. In my translations, I normalize 
elements of Indic origin according to their expected spelling, and occasionally simplify the 
transliteration system for Old Javanese (or Old Malay) elements by merging ṃ with ṅ and ḥ 
with h. Figure 2. EFEO estampage n. 2010 of the inscription of Kapalo Bukit 
Gombak II.


--- [Page 4] ---
200 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
 (1) ° om̐ pa(bh/g)unnira tuma ṅguṃ ku-
 (2)  ḍa vira |
The pronominal clitic - nira here clearly indicates that the language is Old 
Javanese. All previous scholars have read pagunnira  in line 1. This is indeed a 
possible reading, but g and bh are very similar in this script, and in this case, 
both possibilities pagunnira  and pabhunnira need to be considered.
I am aware of two proposals for translation of this short text (with 
the reading pagunnira ) into Indonesian. One is “Bahagia. Atas hasil kerja 
Tumanggung Kudawira [Happiness. On the basis of the result of the work 
of T.K.]”; the other is “Selamat ditetapkannya Tumanggung Kudawira [Hail 
the fact that T.K. has been made irm]”.6 The irst translation can be rejected 
outright, for there is no Javanese base or derived form resembling pagun  that 
has a meaning relatable to ‘hasil kerja [result of work]’, and there is no word or 
grammatical element in the Old Javanese to express the meaning ‘atas [on (the 
basis of)]’. The second translation is presumably based on the a ssumption that 
pagun  is derived from the base pagu . This is a plausible idea, but the translation 
as a nominalized passive causative ( ditetapkannya : ‘the fact of having been made 
irm’) lacks grammatical foundation. Rather, pagun  must with this reading 
be considered a spelling variant of the noun pagvan /pagon , and luctuation 
between u/va/o  is indeed very common in Old Javanese documents (see Acri 
2011: 56–57). Zoetmulder (1982: 1231) glosses pagvan  as “irm base, support”, 
and one may use this as a point of departure in determining the intended 
contextual meaning, depending on one’s interpretation of the original function 
of the stone on which this text is engraved. If, as I do, one considers it likely 
that it had a funerary or commemorative function, then a translation such as 
‘resting place’ might be suitable: ‘ Om̐. The resting place of lord Ku ḍaVīra’. 7
The alternative reading pabhunnira  proposed above is equally acceptable 
from the paleographic point of view, and is likewise susceptible to a 
plausible interpretation, namely as derivate from the base avu ‘ash’:8 
6 The irst is the one proposed by Budi Istiawan (2006: 17), and the second is the one 
proposed by Machi Suhadi as cited by Budi Istiawan from an unpublished report (dated 1991) 
that is not available to me. Bambang Budi Utomo (2007: 71) cites another unpublished report 
of Machi Suhadi (dated 1995) that is likewise unavailable to me. For a review of Bambang Budi 
Utomo’s work, see Grifiths 2011.
7 On the shapes of funerary monuments in West Sumatra, from prehistory to the early 
Islamic period, see Miksic 2004. The stone under discussion has the same general shape as 
several examples illustrated by Miksic, and if indeed it may be classiied among them , then this 
stone represents a stage between prehistory and the Islamic period. In an email of 23 December 
2012, Jan Wisseman Christie writes to me: “I would be inclined to interpret the short inscription 
as ‘Oṃ, The foundation (that is irm establishment) of Tumanggung Ku ḍawīra’. It looks to me 
like a boundary marker for a religious establishment or temple founded by Ku ḍawīra”. This 
seems to me less likely, since in the case of the reading pagun , from nominal base pagu , I expect 
-nira to express the owner or beneiciary, not the agent, of the act of supporting expressed by  
the base pagu . 
8 We must keep in mind that the Malay equivalent is abu and that v/b/bh are liable to 
be used in each other’s place in Old Javanese documents. See Acri 2011: 54–55 and 57–58.

--- [Page 5] ---
201 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
pa-avu-an  ‘place for ashes’, that is, precisely the same formation as modern 
Javanese pawon  ‘kitchen’, but presumably in a different meaning. If we read 
pabhunnira , we may think of a translation like ‘ Om̐. The ash-deposit of lord 
Kuḍa Vīra’.
Either way, it seems very likely that the inscribed stone marked the physical 
remains of tuma ṅguṅ Kuḍa Vīra. It may be noted that there is a person called 
biraparākramakuda  in the contemporary Old Malay inscription Gudam II,9 
standing today right next to the inscription Kapalo Bukit Gombak II at 
Pagaruyung. Furthermore, there is a rakryān damu ṅ pu Vīra mentioned 
in Kr ̥tanagara’s Old Malay inscription of 1286 ce on the socle of the 
Amoghapāśa from Padang Roco (Dharmasraya, West Sumatra) as part of 
the delegation from Java to Sumatra ( dari bhūmi jāva ka svar ṇnabhūmi ).10 
Although this last inscription is at least several decades if not more than a century 
older than the Old Javanese inscription that concerns us here, it still seems 
possible that the use of Old Javanese language indicates direct immigration from 
Java, or descendance from such a Javanese oficial as rakryān damu ṅ pu Vīra. I 
intend to further explore this problem, and situate these epigraphical data in a 
wider context, in my planned monograph on the inscriptions of Ādityavarman.
2 Inscribed makara  from the northern Gopura of Candi 
Kedaton, Muara Jambi temple complex, Jambi
During a visit to the Muara Jambi complex on 22 December 2011, Agus 
Widiatmoko of the Bureau for Conservation of Antiquities (Balai Pelestarian 
Peninggalan Purbakala) in Jambi showed me some interesting recent 
discoveries. During excavations in preparation of the restoration of the Gopura 
at the northern end of the large area in front of Candi Kedaton that appears to 
show no further traces of construction except one manapo (mound), three out of a 
presumed original set of four makara s were found in their original position. Each 
has roughly the same dimensions, but the sculpture is different in each case. The 
two makara s on the southern staircase show nāga s protruding from the makara s’ 
mouths; the sole makara  found on the northern staircase has a mythical creature11 
protruding from its mouth. I have recorded the following approximate 
dimensions (height, width, depth) per makara :
Southeast: 123 × 63 × 113 cm (Figures 3–4)
Southwest: 123 × 67 × 130 cm (Figures 5–6)
Northeast: 123 × 62 ×114 cm (Figure 7)
9 This inscription (issued by Akārendravarman, whom I hold to have been 
Ādityavarman’s successor) was provisionally published by De Casparis (1995: 923), who was 
however unable to read the element bira (and who held a different view on the relationship of 
Akārendravarman to Ādityavarman). Note that the spelling is here kuda , not kuḍa as in the Old 
Javanese text, but these are presumably spelling equivalents (just as vira and bira are), unless 
the difference is due to the distinction between Malay and Javanese.
10 The socle is held in the National Museum, Jakarta, under inventory number D.198A. 
For the text engraved on it, see Krom 1916.
11 Half lion, half-ram? The type is well known in Java.

--- [Page 6] ---
202 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
 Figure 4. Northern Gopura, Candi 
Kedaton, Muara Jambi. Southeast 
makara  viewed from the South 
(Photograph by the author, 2011). 
Figure 5. Northern Gopura, Candi 
Kedaton, Muara Jambi. Southwest 
makara  viewed from the South 
(Photograph by the author, 2011).Figure 3. Northern Gopura, Candi 
Kedaton, Muara Jambi. Southeast 
makara  viewed from the East 
(Photograph by the author, 2011).


--- [Page 7] ---
203 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
The two southern makara s bear writing in relief of a mode seen in 
inscriptions on the island of Java from the late tenth through the early eleventh 
century, but not to my knowledge found anywhere else on Sumatra.12
12 In my opinion, it is not useful to classify this mode of writing as ‘(Kediri) quadrate 
script’, because this category should be restricted to highly ornamental styles of writing, as 
implied by the discussion of De Casparis (1975: 42). However, this scholar himself, like all 
Figure 6. Northern Gopura, Candi Kedaton, Muara Jambi. 
Southeast makara  viewed from the West (Photograph by the 
author, 2011).
Figure 7. Northern Gopura, Candi Kedaton, Muara Jambi. 
Northeast makara  viewed from the North (Photograph by the 
author, 2011).

--- [Page 8] ---
204 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
The Southeast makara  bears an inscription comprising only of two syllables 
(Figures 8–9), enclosed in opening/closing signs (in the shape of an opening 
counter-clockwise and a closing clockwise curl, here both represented by the 
sign @), on the knob at the hind end of the ‘manes’ of the makara : @ so ja @.
                                                                 
predecessors, actually confounds highly ornamental modes of more or less quadratic shape 
with plain ones such as the mode that concerns us here.
Figure 8. Northern Gopura, Candi Kedaton, Muara Jambi. 
Inscription on the lank of the Southeast makara  viewed from the 
East (Photograph by the author, 2011).
Figure 9. Northern Gopura, Candi Kedaton, Muara Jambi. 
Inscription on the lank of the Southeast makara  viewed from the 
West (Photograph by the author, 2011).

--- [Page 9] ---
205 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
The meaning of this short text is not immediately evident. I hesitantly propose  
to read the akṣaras together as one word, soja, and to understand this as a 
spelling equivalent of svaja , which literally means ‘self-born’ and normally 
denotes a kind of snake, perhaps a ‘viper’, in Sanskrit. This might correspond 
with the fact that this makara  shows a cobra protruding from its mouth. Another 
possibility is to read this word together with the text on the Southwest  makara , 
as I will discuss below.
The Southwest makara  bears an inscription of two lines on the hind part of 
its proper right (outer) side (Figure 10). The language is distinctly Old Javanese, 
not Old Malay, as revealed most explicitly by the same pronominal clitic - nira 
that we have encountered in the irst inscription discussed above, attached here 
to a derivative of the typically Javanese base vurṣita.13 The present one reads:
(1) //pamur ṣitanira mpu ku-
(2) suma [liminal signs]
The sign represented here as // is a liminal sign of the same type as the four 
non-letter/non-numeral signs which terminate the text, but its shape with a 
long clockwise curl passing through a vertical bar is not known to me from 
other Indonesian inscriptions. With precisely the same sentence structure as 
that of the inscription Kapalo Bukit Gombak II, the prima facie  interpretation of 
the text is: ‘The gift of master Kusuma’. If we now return to the problem of the 
word soja, it needs to be recalled that we do not know the original indigenous 
13 This base, of common occurrence in Old Javanese, has the appearance of a loanword 
from Sanskrit, but its source in that language is not evident (Zoetmulder 1982: 2334). The word 
does not seem to have been discussed in Gonda’s Sanskrit in Indonesia  (1973).
Figure 10. Northern Gopura, Candi Kedaton, Muara Jambi. 
Inscription on the lank of the Southwest makara  viewed from the 
West (Photograph by the author, 2011).

--- [Page 10] ---
206 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
appellation for the beasts that are referred to as makara  in archaeological 
literature, and it is not inconceivable that in soja we have found precisely 
an/the original term in Old Javanese for makara  in general. In that case, the 
inscriptions on the two makara s may form one sentence, meaning ‘ Makara s, 
the gifts of master Kusuma’.
  
The donation recorded here can be dated on palaeographic grounds to 
about the period 950–1050 ce. For a form of writing in relief that is basically 
Figures 11–13. OD Photographs 2692–2694, dated 1917, of the inscription of Puh 
Sarang, courtesy of the Kern Institute, Leiden University Library.

--- [Page 11] ---
207 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
identical to the akṣaras on these two makara s can be observed in two internally 
dated epigraphic monuments from East Java. The irst is the inscription of Puh 
Sarang in Kediri regency, dated to 924 Śaka (1003 ce), captured in a group of 
excellent archaeological photographs from the former Oudheidkundige Dienst :14 
OD 2692–2694 (Figures 11–13).15 The other East Javanese epigraphic monument 
is the group of short inscriptions in relief from the bathing place Jolotundo on 
Mount Penanggungan, one of which (Figure 14) bears the millésime  899 Śaka 
(977/8 ce), the other ones – for example the one reading @ gəmpəṅ· @ depicted 
here in Figure 15 – being dateable by association. A third relevant comparison 
is furnished by the irst of four associated stones from the Sukabumi area of 
West Java on which is engraved an inscription recording the foundation by 
king Śrī Jayabhūpati of the domain of Sa ṅ Hya ṅ Tapak ‘The Sacred Footprint’ 
in the year 952 Śaka (1030 ce). This stone is captured in OD 1456 (Figure 16).16 
14 A database comprising all of the more than 21,000 of these “OD” photos that arrived 
in public Dutch collections until the late 1950s, before contacts between Indonesian and Dutch 
institutions inally became too severely weakened after decolonization, is searchable at https://
socrates.leidenuniv.nl (under the collection “Kern Institute”: use preix “OD-” with hyphen  for 
searches by OD number). A substantial number of photographs is already available in digital 
form, including the OD photos used for this article, and can be viewed through the Leiden 
website.
15 See also the photo of a drawing OD 3778. For the most reliable reading of this text, I 
refer to Damais (1955: 243).
16 See also the photo of an estampage that is plate 1 in Pleyte 1916. For this part of the 
inscription, a reading with slight improvements vis-à-vis  that of Pleyte was offered by Damais 
(1955: 86–87). Different from the spelling we see in pamur ṣita on the Muara Jambi makara , this 
Saṅ Hya ṅ Tapak inscription shows the highly idiosyncratic feature of consistently placing the 
sign for syllable-inal r (called layar  in Javanese, repha  in Sanskrit) on top of the akṣara after 
which it should be read, rather than on the following one (see, for example, ° vārdana ° in line 
8). This feature, which later became the norm in Javanese manuscripts  (see Acri 2011: 85) and 
is also found, surely under Javanese inluence, in an Old Malay inscription from Lampung 
(Damais 1962b: 298), is not, to my knowledge, observed in any other inscriptions of the islands 
of Java and Sumatra unquestionably datable before the ifteenth century ce; the palaeographic 
shift in placement of the layar  that has occurred on Java is, alas, not discussed in De Casparis 
1975. The fact that our Muara Jambi inscription places the layar in the normal position possibly 
means that we can exclude an, anyhow unlikely, connection with West Java.

--- [Page 12] ---
208 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
                                                                              
 
     
Figure 15. OD Photograph 6575, dated 1922, of an inscription 
at Jolotundo, courtesy of the Kern Institute, Leiden University 
Library.
Figure 14. Inscription with millésime 899 Śaka at Jolotundo 
(Photograph by Hadi Sidomulyo, 2012).

--- [Page 13] ---
209 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
This paleographic dating conirms the stylistic one proposed by Marijke 
Klokke (Forthcoming), who informs me that it is abnormal for pairs of non-
identical makara s to be erected at opposite sides of a single staircase. There is 
thus some reason to suspect that the newly discovered makara s of the Gopura 
of Candi Kedaton did not originally belong together. One may speculate that 
they were manufactured on Java, before they were brought to Jambi at Mpu 
Kusuma’s behest, and such a Javanese connection would explain the use of 
Old Javanese language, but even in this scenario we remain in the dark as to 
whether the inscriptions would have been engraved before or after transport 
to Sumatra, and why the norm of erecting identical makara s in pairs was not 
respected. 
3 Inscribed golden bowl found in Rokan Hilir, Riau
In the framework of the collaborative research project of Pusat Penelitian 
dan Pengembangan Arkeologi Nasional (recently renamed Pusat Arkeologi 
Nasional, or National Centre for Archaeology) and the EFEO to prepare an 
inventory of all (non-Islamic) pre-1600 inscriptions of maritime Southeast 
Asia, Machi Suhadi and Daniel Perret visited the Museum Daerah Riau at 
Pekanbaru on 12 April 2004. They found there, besides inscriptions from 
Muara Takus,17 an inscribed low golden bowl (Figures 17–18), said to have 
been found in kecamatan  Tanah Putih, Rokan Hilir regency, in Riau province, 
and to have entered the museum’s collection in the 1990s.18 As far as I know, 
17  For these I refer to Grifiths Forthcoming b.
18 The object and its inscription are mentioned in Gallop Forthcoming. This paper deals 
with Malay inscriptions on silverware of the eighteenth and nineteenth century. The structure 
of these inscriptions is remarkably consistent with that of the inscription of one millennium 
Figure 16. OD Photograph 1456, dating from about 1912, of 
inscribed stone National Museum D.73, courtesy of the Kern 
Institute, Leiden University Library.

--- [Page 14] ---
210 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
the object and its inscription have not yet been published. The dimensions 
Machi Suhadi and Daniel Perret recorded are height 5.5 cm, diameter 15 cm, 
thickness 0.1 cm. 
   
The inscription (Figure 19) can be read and translated as follows:
 saragi da lakha ṇi
 ‘Bowl of lady/sir Lakha ṇi’
earlier discussed here. Gallop has observed that “A signiicant proportion of named owners 
appear to be female”.
Figures 17–18. Golden bowl in Museum Daerah Riau (Photographs by Daniel Perret, 
2004).
Figure 19. Inscription on the golden bowl in Museum Daerah Riau (Photograph by 
Daniel Perret, 2004).


--- [Page 15] ---
211 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
Close similarities with this object and its inscription can be observed in an 
artefact from the Wonoboyo hoard, now held in the National Museum at Jakarta 
under inventory number 8924. The bowl in question bears the text saragi dya ḥ 
buṅā, meaning ‘Bowl of lady/sir Bu ṅā’, as reported in various publications, 
none of which regrettably includes a photo of the inscription itself.19 The 
Riau bowl can be dated, on the basis of paleographical considerations, to the 
ninth or tenth century ce. As I have pointed out elsewhere (Grifiths 2011), 
at this period we are unable to distinguish Javanese and Sumatran forms of 
the Kawi script that is used here, so the shape of the script tells us little about 
the place of manufacture and utilization. On the honoriic element da/ḍa, 
used both in Old Malay and in Old Javanese, I refer to a recent publication 
(Grifiths Forthcoming a). The name Lakha ṇi is evidently based on a Prakrit 
form corresponding to Sanskrit Lakṣaṇī,20 which could theoretically be either 
feminine (from the stem lakṣaṇī) or masculine (from the stem lakṣaṇin). Since the 
word buṅa means ‘lower’ in Malay, it is perhaps more natural to assume that 
Dyah Bu ṅā was a lady;21 and since a proper name Lak ṣaṇa is attested several 
times in Old Javanese inscriptions (Damais 1970: 713) where it almost certainly 
denoted men, one might expect a feminine variant of the name to have existed, 
and to have taken the form Lak ṣaṇī. The argument remains tenuous, but I am 
somewhat inclined to assume that Dyah Bu ṅā and Da Lakha ṇi were ladies.
As for the language of the inscription, there is no morpheme that explicitly 
points to Old Javanese, but since there is no known attestation of the word 
saragi  in any form of Malay known to me, and since there is no reason to doubt 
that the Wonoboyo inscription is in Old Javanese, I am inclined to assume 
19 On the Wonoboyo hoard in general, see Lunsingh Scheurleer 2010: 30–31 (with further 
references, to which the special 1993 issue of Berkala Arkeologi  Yogyakarta and the articles 
Wahyono Martowikrido 1998 and 1999 may be added). Photos of the bowl in question have 
been published in Bianchini 1995, item 22, pp. 84–85, a French-language exhibition catalog later 
republished in English as Webb 1999, item 24, pp. 72–73. The descriptio n of the bowl, including 
a reading of the inscription, seems to be due to Martono Martowikrido. Only this scholar has 
given a reproduction in the form of an eye-copy (1998: 136). He is also the only scholar to read 
buṅā rather than buṅa. Judging by his eye-copy, this reading is correct. However, the discussions 
in his several publications of the meaning, signiicance and date of the inscription, contain 
various doubtful points. The attribution to the early tenth century remains open to question, 
and an earlier dating cannot be excluded. The reading of the inscription was also published in 
Riboet Darmosoetopo 1993.
20  Compare De Casparis 1988 on such Prakrit loanwords in Old Javanese, especially 
(pp. 60–61) on the word lākha  deriving from Sanskrit lākṣa ‘lac’ through an expected Prakrit 
form lākkha . Since degeminated spelling is a common feature of written documents in Java, as 
elsewhere in ‘Indianized’ South and Southeast Asia, I do not think it is necessary to follow D e 
Casparis in speaking of ‘Proto-Neo-Indian’ for the mere reason that we do not ind lākkha .
21 The name buṅa (with short inal a) is attested at least once as part of a place name in 
the epigraphy of ancient Java, but in an inscription in Old Malay language (Damais 1970: 397, 
691). I do not think the difference a/ā is in itself necessarily signiicant, and in this respect I 
disagree with Boechari, who believed that vowel length in the proper name Sala ḍū necessarily 
indicates a female (see Boechari 1967–68: 15, 2012: 128). Without further examples, it seems 
dangerous to apply a pattern of the Sanskrit language to names from local languages where 
vowel length is not phonemically distinctive. But in this case, I do argue, on other grounds, 
that we are dealing with a woman.

--- [Page 16] ---
212 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
that the language of the Riau inscription was the same. Compared with the 
preceding two items, and especially the irst, which was certainly produced 
locally, the present case of a highly portable artefact leaves open the possibility 
that the inscribed artefact was not locally produced; the determination of the 
language as Old Javanese gives speciic reason to think of an import from 
Java, whether in the distant or in the more recent past. Without knowledge of 
the archaeological context where the object was found, to conirm or exclude 
that it is a production or settlement site likely to have been the original place 
of manufacture or utilization of the bowl, this of course remains a matter of 
pure speculation. At the very least, the pair of bowls bearing self-identifying 
label inscriptions with the word saragi  clearly show that Zoetmulder’s gloss 
of this word as meaning “a copper kettle or pot“ (1982: 1687) needs to be 
revised to agree more closely with the shape of these bowls and to include 
also objects made of gold.
References
Acri, Andrea. 2011. Dharma Pātañjala; A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java 
Studied in the Light of Related Old Javanese and Sanskrit Texts . Groningen: 
Egbert Forsten.
Bianchini, Marie-Claude (ed.). 1995. Les ors de l’archipel indonésien . Paris: 
Réunion des Musées Nationaux.
Boechari. 1967–68. “Rakryān Mahāmantri i Hino; A study of the highest 
court dignitary of ancient Java up to the 13th century A.D.”, Journal of the 
Historical Society of Singapore : 7–20.
Boechari. 2012. Melacak sejarah kuno Indonesia lewat prasasti/Tracing ancient 
Indonesian history through inscriptions . Jakarta: École française d’Extrême-
Orient, Universitas Indonesia, Kepustakaan Populer Gramedia.
Brandes, J.L.A. 1913. Oud-Javaansche Oorkonden . Nagelaten transscripties van 
wijlen Dr. J.L.A. Brandes. Uitgegeven door Dr. N.J. Krom. Batavia: Albrecht 
& Co, ’s-Hage: M. Nijhoff.
Casparis, J.G. de. 1975. Indonesian palaeography; A history of writing in Indonesia 
from the beginnings to c. a.d. 1500 . Leiden: Brill. [ Handbuch der Orientalistik  
3.4.1.]
Casparis, J.G. de. 1988. “Some notes on words of Middle Indian origin in 
Indonesian languages (especially Old Javanese)”, in: L. Santa Maria, 
Faizah Soenoto Rivai, and A. Sorrentino (eds), Papers from the IIIrd European 
Colloquium on Malay and Indonesian Studies, Naples, 2–4 June 1981, pp. 51–69. 
Naples: Istituto Universitario Orientale, Dipartimento di Studi Asiatici.  
[Series Minor 30.]
Casparis, J.G. de. 1995. “Peranan Adityawarman, Putera Melayu di Asia 
Tenggara”, in: Ismail Hussein, A. Aziz Deraman, Abd. Rahman Al-Ahmadi 
(eds), Tamadun Melayu , III, pp. 918–943. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa 
dan Pustaka, Kementerian Pendidikan Malaysia.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1955. “Etudes d’épigraphie indonésienne. IV: 

--- [Page 17] ---
213 ARLO GRIFFITHS , Inscriptions of Sumatra
Discussion de la date des inscriptions”, BEFEO 47.1: 7–290.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1962a. “Études soumatranaises. I. La date de 
l’inscription de Hujung Langit”, BEFEO  50.2: 275–288. [Indonesian 
translation in Damais 1995: 27–45.]
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1962b. “Études soumatranaises. II. L’inscription de 
Ulu Bәlu (Soumatra méridional)”, BEFEO  50.2: 289–310.
Damais, Louis-Charles.  1970. Répertoire onomastique de l’épigraphie javanaise 
(jusqu’à pu Si ṇḍok Śrī Īśānawikrama  Dharmmottu ṅgadewa) . Paris: École 
française d’Extrême-Orient.
Damais, Louis-Charles. 1995. Epigrai dan Sejarah Nusantara; Pilihan karangan 
Louis-Charles Damais . Jakarta: École  française d’Extrême-Orient.
Darmosoetopo, Riboet. 1993. “Beberapa benda purbakala berprasasti pendek 
temuan dari Wonoboyo”, Berkala Arkeologi (Yogyakarta), tahun XIII [Edisi 
Khusus]: 37–47.
Gallop, Annabel. Forthcoming. “Malay silverware with Jawi inscriptions”. 
Paper presented at the International Conference on Southeast Asian Art, 
Manggha Museum, Krakow, 29 September – 1 October 2011.
Gonda, Jan. 1973. Sanskrit in Indonesia . Second Edition. Delhi: International 
Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan. [Reprint 1998.]
Grifiths, Arlo. 2011. “Inscriptions of Sumatra. Further data on the epigraphy 
of the Musi and Batang Hari River Basins”, Archipel 81: 129–175.
Grifiths, Arlo. Forthcoming a. “The Inscription on an Embossed Image 
of Śiva in Gold Leaf from Central Java, Indonesia”, in: M.J. Klokke 
and V. Degroot (eds), Materializing Southeast Asia’s Past; Selected 
Papers from the 12th International Conference of the European Association 
of Southeast Asian Archaeologists , Vol. II, pp. 119–121. Singapore: NUS 
Press.
Grifiths, Arlo. Forthcoming b. “Inscriptions of Sumatra. III. The Padang 
Lawas Corpus Studied along with Inscriptions from Sorik Merapi (North 
Sumatra) and Muara Takus (Riau)”, in: D. Perret (ed.), History of Padang 
Lawas, North Sumatra. II: Societies of Padang Lawas (9th c. – 13th c.).  Paris: 
Association Archipel.
Istiawan, Budi. 2006. Selintas prasasti dari Melayu Kuno . Batusangkar: Balai 
Pelestarian Peninggalan Purbakala.
Jordaan, R.E. and B.E. Colless. 2009. The Mahārājas of the Isles; The Śailendras 
and the problem of Śrīvijaya . Leiden: University of Leiden, Department of 
Languages and Cultures of Southeast Asia and Oceania. [Semaian 25.]
Klokke, Marijke J. Forthcoming. “The Padang Lawas makaras  and Javano-
Sumatran  relationships in art”, in: D. Perret (ed.), History of Padang 
Lawas, North Sumatra. II: Societies of Padang Lawas (9th c. – 13th c.).  Paris: 
Association Archipel.
Krom, N.J. 1912. “Inventaris der Oudheden in de Padangsche Bovenlanden”, 
Oudheidkundig Verslag 1912  (bijlage G): 33–50.
Krom, N.J. 1916. “Een Sumatraansche inscriptie van koning K ṛtanagara”, 
Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen , 
Letterkunde, 5de reeks, Vol. 2 (1917): 306–339.

--- [Page 18] ---
214 Wacana  Vol. 14 No. 2 (October 2012)
Lunsingh Scheurleer, Pauline. 2010. “The archaeological gold collection”, in: 
F. Brinkgreve, P. Lunsingh Scheurleer, and D. Stuart-Fox (eds), Kemegahan 
emas di Museum Nasional Indonesia / Golden splendour in the National Mu seum 
of Indonesia , pp. 24–33. Jakarta: Museum Nasional.
Martowikrido, Wahyono. 1998.“The short inscriptions of the Wonoboyo 
hoard”, in: M.J. Klokke and T. de Bruijn (eds), Southeast Asian Archaeology  
1996 , pp. 135–145. Hull: Centre for Southeast Asian Studies.
Martowikrido, Wahyono. 1999. “Preliminary notes on the technique of the 
making of the Wonoboyo hoard”, in: W.H. Kal (ed.), Precious metals in 
early South East Asia; Proceedings of the second Seminar on G old Studies , 
pp. 73–76. Amsterdam: Royal Tropical Institute.
Miksic, John. 2004. “From megaliths to tombstones; Th e transition from 
prehistory to the early Islamic period in highland West Sumatra”, Indonesia 
and the Malay World  32 (93): 191–210. 
Pleyte, C.M. 1916. “Mahārāja Çrī Jayabhūpati; Su ṇḍa’s oudst bekende vorst, 
A. D. 1030”, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 57: 201–218.
Utomo, Bambang Budi. 2007. Prasasti-prasasti Sumatra . Jakarta: Pusat Penelitian 
dan Pengembangan Arkeologi Nasional.
Webb, Jennifer (ed.). 1999. Indonesian gold; Treasures from the National Museum, 
Jakarta . Brisbane: Queensland Art Gallery.
Zoetmulder, P.J. 1982. Old Javanese-English dictionary . With the collaboration 
of S.O. Robson. ’s-Gravenhage: Nijhoff.