          
 Quaderni di Linguistica e Studi Orientali / Working Papers in Linguistics and Oriental Studies 
n
. 1 (2015), pp. 233-258 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.13128/QULSO-2421-7220-16524
ISSN 2421-7220 (online)
www.fupress.com/bsfm-qulso  
2015 Firenze University Press
The Role of kunten Materials 
in the Process of Sino-Japanese Hybridization*
Valerio Luigi Alberizzi
Waseda University (<valerio.luigi.alberizzi@gmail.com>)
Abstract:
The history of the Japanese written language can be seen as a main 
frame of different registers of the native language – buntai  文体 – 
intersecting at various levels with a foreign one, namely classical 
Chinese. Although these diatypes are different, they are all part of 
the same lexico-syntactic repertoire shared by the community and 
whose use is determined by context. Hence, the type of code in use 
depends on the field and purpose of the message. In recent years the 
field has been enriched by a number of thought-provoking theories. 
However, buntai studies still constitute a complex and intricate dis -
cipline within which numerous questions remain to be answered. 
This paper will a) provide a review of existing scholarship on the 
role played by kunten  materials in defining the formation process 
of Sino-Japanese hybrid writing – wakan konkōbun ; b) outline, for 
the first time, the main differences between the two most contro -
versial forms of written language, Japanized written Chinese – wa -
ka kanbun – and Sino-Japanese hybrid writing, and redefine their 
role within the history of the Japanese written language; c) survey 
textual evidence to show how an embryonic form of Sino-Japanese 
hybrid writing existed before the twelfth century, proving that the 
evolution of wakan konkōbun is not directly linked to the formation 
of middle Japanese.
Keywords : Kanbun kundoku, Kunten Materials, Sino-Japanese Hy -
bridization, Wakan konkōbun
* This study presents some of the findings of the research project “ Wakan konkōbun in 
the Insei period: The Case of Gukanshō ” 院政期の和漢混淆文の研究 -『愚 管 抄』を中心
に (Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research – C (General) 2014-2016, project director: Valerio 
L. Alberizzi). Unless otherwise indicated, English translations are by the author. 
valerio alberizzi
234 
1. Sino-Japanese Hybridization
1.1 Sino-Japanese Hybrid Writing and its Relation with kunten Materials
The history of the Japanese written language can be seen as a main frame 
of different registers of the native language – buntai 文体 – intersecting at 
various levels with a foreign one, namely classical Chinese. Although these 
diatypes are different, they are all part of the same lexico-syntactic repertoire 
shared by the community and whose use is determined by context. Hence, 
the type of code in use depends on the field and purpose of the message.
1
In recent years the field has been enriched by a number of thought-
provoking theories. However, buntai studies still constitute a complex and 
intricate discipline within which numerous questions remain to be answered. 
The issue of classification is one of them and, along with the lack of an es-
tablished scholarly vocabulary in the field, probably one of the most urgent.
This is particularly true for what is probably one of the most controversial 
issues in the history of the Japanese language: wakan konkōbun 和漢混淆
文 – the Sino-Japanese hybrid writing. The highly hybridized nature of this 
written form has made it difficult to classify and has spurred a lively debate. 
The term has been used to indicate any style combining classical Chinese 
with Japanese in one way or another.
The vast array of terms used to indicate this type of written language is 
in and of itself testament to the complexity of the task involved with defin-
ing its characteristics. T o name but a few, such terms include kojikitai 古
事記體, wakan kōzatsubun 和漢交雑文, wakan majiribun 和漢交り文, 
konkōtai 混交體 (Konakamura 1879: 289-298), wakan konwabun 和漢混
和文 (Mikami and Takatsu 1890: 27-28), zatsubuntai 雑文体 (Yano 1886: 
245), wakankon’yōbun 和漢混用文 (Yamamoto 1965: 355), gazoku setcchūtai 
雅俗折衷体 (Tsubouchi 1981: 140-159), and, more recently, wakan yūgō 
和漢融合 (Ogawa 2008: 119).
T erminological issues aside, the most common explanation considers 
wakan konkōbun as an independent form of the written language which devel-
oped since the twelfth century. Scholars argue that wakan konkōbun is based 
on the syntaxes of both native and Sinicized forms of the written language 
from the tenth century which integrate a vernacular lexicon — i.e. zokugo 俗
語 — with non-orthodox Chinese features, both lexical and syntactic. As such, 
the Sino-Japanese hybrid would be on a par with such traditional forms of the 
Japanese written language as wabun 和文, kanbun 漢文 and waka kanbun 
和化漢文. The general trend among scholars has been to consider wakan 
konkōbun as an independent type of written language. However, since the 
1 In linguistics, a diatype is a type of language defined by its purpose, identified by pe -
culiar choices in vocabulary and grammatical constructions, etc. (Gregory 1967: 177-197).
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
235 
1980s others have challenged its role as an independent form of the Japanese 
language (Yamada 1979: 257-277).
Be that as it may, as a practice of textual decodification kanbun kundoku 
漢文訓読 undeniably represents a fundamental step in the assimilation of 
the native language within a Sinicized context. By means of an autochthonous 
register, the Chinese characters of the original text were given a correspond-
ing Japanese reading whenever necessary. This was achieved by way of the 
so-called kanaten 仮名点, small gloss phonograms inserted to the right of 
the main characters in the text. By glossing the inflectional morphemes as-
sociated with Japanese verbs and adjectives, the same technique also allowed 
to reconcile the differences between an isolating language, Chinese, and an 
agglutinative one, Japanese.
Japanese scholars currently acknowledge the significance of these glossed 
materials – kunten shiryō 訓点資料 – for synchronic and diachronic studies 
of the Japanese language. However, the results achieved in this field by of 
a small group of specialists who began their research in the early twentieth 
century are still relatively new.
Moreover, while recent theories have been of great interest, one cannot 
deny that the study of kunten materials is still a narrow field not only in the 
West but also in Japan, and carries almost no practical application in the 
humanities, especially the history of language and literature. The difficulty in 
establishing a common basic knowledge of kunten materials among specialists 
may also be attributable to the fact that most scholars consider kundoku as 
an expedient devised by and for those who cannot read a Chinese text in the 
original, which de facto places kundoku in a lower “didactic” place within the 
studies of Chinese and its reception among foreign cultures.
There is no denying that one must tread lightly in using these sources 
as evidence for the historical evolution of the Japanese language, not only 
because the glosses were provisional notations jotted down quickly in the 
interlinear spaces of the main text, but also because they reflected the pro-
ficiency (or lack thereof) of the glossator, and as such errors were bound to 
occur. Nevertheless, the study of kunten materials still brings to light a highly 
refined system with a long tradition, a system that has played a key role in the 
evolution and formation of the Japanese language and that, over the centuries, 
has sustained an array of intellectual activities many of which are worthy of 
scholarly consideration. 
Aside from the distinctive traits of the language – kuntengo 訓点語 – 
revealed in kunten materials, the usefulness of these sources extends to other 
forms of pre-modern writing as well. Therefore, the language of kunten ma-
terials plays a fundamental role in defining the features of almost all forms 
of written Japanese that show a contamination between Sino-Japanese and 
autochthonous writings, forms such as waka kanbun or the aforementioned 
wakan konkōbun.
valerio alberizzi
236 
In the pages that follow, I will:
a) provide a review of existing scholarship on the role played by kunten 
materials in defining the formation process of Sino-Japanese hybrid writing 
– wakan konkōbun – in order to expand our understanding of the field and 
to stimulate future inquiries; 
b) outline, for the first time, the main differences between the two most 
controversial forms of written language, Japanized written Chinese – waka 
kanbun – and Sino-Japanese hybrid writing, and redefine their role within 
the history of the Japanese written language; 
c) survey textual evidence to show how an embryonic form of Sino-
Japanese hybrid writing existed before the twelfth century, proving that the 
evolution of wakan konkōbun is not directly linked to the formation of mid-
dle Japanese.
1.2 Wakan konkōbun, a Brief History 
A brief history of the evolution of the Japanese written language would 
set its beginning in the eighth century. At that time, a flourishing interest 
in Chinese culture resulted in the development of a written language highly 
indebted to continental models. This was followed, in the tenth century, by 
the emergence of a new native style codified in the refined literary prose of 
the period. Later on, the turbulent years of the late twelfth century brought 
great change not only in society but also in language: with the spread of Bud-
dhism among commoners, literati monks and scholars began to create of a 
new, hybrid form of expression, merging the rational Sinicized variety of the 
eighth century with the tenth-century lyrical native style, and paving the way 
for pre-modern Japanese.
This historical junction is usually identified with the emergence of the 
Sino-Japanese hybrid writing. For example, The Princeton Companion to Clas-
sical Japanese Literature reads:
Wakan konkōbun 和漢混淆文. A style mingling Japanese and Sinified readings of 
characters, words, and elements, as opposed to wabun, which uses more or less ex-
clusively Japanese readings and diction. The mixed style is represented most beau -
tifully in classical literature by the Heike Monogatari, but in effect this mixed style 
is the basis of much classical writing and of modern Japanese. 
(Miner et al. 1985: 303)
In a reference work on medieval history and culture Deal offers a similar 
yet more accurate definition:
Japanese-Chinese mixed style (wakan konkobun) is, strictly speaking, a form of clas-
sical Japanese. It is a hybrid writing style that intermingles Japanese and Chinese 
character readings, grammar, and lexical items. Japanese-Chinese mixed style evolved 
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
237 
out of the practice of adding marks to Chinese texts in order that they could be 
read more easily by Japanese readers. This style developed in the medieval period 
and was used into the Edo period. Classic examples of compositions in this style 
are two Kamakura-period texts, Heike monogatari  (Tale of the Heike ) and Hojoki  
(An Account of My Hut). 
(Deal 2006: 246)
These definitions clearly rely on Japanese sources and are based on theo-
ries that are well accepted among Japanese scholars. The works that Japanese 
scholars more often tend to associate with the formation and evolution of the 
Sino-Japanese hybrid writing are war tales – gunki monogatari 軍記物語 – 
random jottings – zuihitsu 随筆 –, travel diaries – kikō 紀行 – and anecdotal 
literature – setsuwa 説話 – literary genres that emerged in, or flourished since 
the twelfth century.
Among the best known twelfth-century texts are the war tales of Hōgen 
monogatari 保元物語 and Heiji monogatari 平治物語, anecdotal literature 
in the league of Uchigikishū 打聞集 and Konjaku monogatarishū 今昔物語
集, and the transcribed sermons of Hokkeshuhō ippyakuza kikigakishō 法華
修法一百座聞書抄. Thirteenth-century works include Heike monogatari  
平家物語, the most famous and most poetic of all war tales, but also the 
random jottings of Hōjōki 方丈記 and travel diaries such as Kaidōki 海道
記 and Tōkan kikō 東関紀行. Finally, the war tales of T aiheiki 太平記 and 
Gikeiki 義経記 and zuihitsu such as Tsurezuregusa 徒然草 are examples of 
fourteenth-century literary works written in late Sino-Japanese hybrid.
Yamada Yoshio’s 山田孝雄 (1873-1958) path-breaking works on Heike 
monogatari played a pivotal role in strengthening the connection between 
the epic account of the struggle between the Taira and Minamoto clans and 
wakan konkōbun as its representative literary style. In Heike monogatarikō 平
家物語考 (Reflections on Heike monogatari, 1911) as well as in the monu-
mental Heike monogatari no gohō 平家物語の語法 (The language of Heike 
monogatari, 1914) Yamada praises the text of Heike monogatari as the most 
elegant form of Sino-Japanese hybrid writing.
This form of written language, he contends, perfectly harmonizes Chinese 
vocabulary – kango 漢語 – and the native syntactical structure in one single 
context, bringing the development of Sino-Japanese to fruition and making 
it into a full-fledged form of expression. Also distinctive to the Heike mono-
gatari, Yamada argues, are a highly refined prose consisting of antithetical 
constructions based on alternating seven-five syllables (characters) as well as 
the use of vernacular. Following a thorough examination of all extant copies 
of the manuscript conducted on behalf of the Japanese Ministry of Education, 
Yamada concluded that the most accurate text was the copy of an early manu-
script from the second and third years of Enkyō 延慶 (1309-1310) known 
as Enkyōbon Heike monogatari 延慶本平家物語 (Yamada 1915: 24-25).
valerio alberizzi
238 
Coincidental as it may be, one cannot help but notice the similarity 
between Yamada’s descriptions and the main features of wakan konkōbun 
as outlined earlier. Especially influential to later theories may have been 
Yamada’s thesis on the role played by alternate prose, a style reminiscent of 
the Six Dynasties (220-589 AD) parallel prose – i.e. pianwen 駢文. Most 
twentieth-century works identify this elaborate style, which makes extensive 
use of such poetic techniques as parallelism, sound patterns, and allusion, as 
one of the distinguishing traits of the Sino-Japanese hybrid prose. The best-
known examples thereof are the opening Sections of Heike monogatari and 
Hojōki. Let us take a closer look at the Heike:
祇園精舍の鐘の聲、 諸行無常の響あり。 娑羅雙樹の花の色、 盛者必衰のことは
りをあらはす。 おごれる人も久しからず。 只春の夜の夢のごとし。 たけき者も遂
にはほろびぬ、 偏に風の前の塵に同じ。
‘The sound of the Gion Shōja bells echoes the impermanence of all things; the color 
of the śāla flowers reveals the truth that the prosperous must decline. The proud do 
not endure, they are like a dream on a spring night; the mighty fall at last, they are 
as dust before the wind’.
(Kindaichi et al. 1959: 83; Engl. trans. by McCullough 1988: 23)
A quick look at the structure of these famous lines reveals certain features 
that a Japanese reader would have perceived as new and different in tone with 
respect to existing literature. First, as Yamada points out (1915: 24-25), we 
have four distinct couplets that parallel each other in structure: Gion shōja no 
kane no koe / shogyō mujō no hibiki ari; Shara sōju no hana no iro / jōsha hissui 
no kotowari wo arawasu; Ogoreru hito mo hisashikarazu / tada haru no yume 
no gotoshi; T akeki mono mo tsui ni wa horobinu / hitoe ni kaze no mae no chiri 
ni onaji. Numerous quotations from religious works contribute to the crea-
tion of a highly Sinicized tone: shogyō mujō 諸行無常 is a direct quotation 
from the first verse of a gāthā – ge 偈 – a poetic composition included in the 
Mahāparinirvāna sutra – Nehangyō 涅槃経.
2 The corresponding phrase in the 
following couplet, jōsha hissui 盛者必衰, is taken from Nin’ō kyō 仁王経, an 
apocryphal sūtra. Finally, the second phrase in each of the last two couplets 
is a free adaptation from Ōjō kōshiki 往生講式, Eikan’s 永観 (1033-1111) 
treatise on the proper rituals to be observed during the ceremonies of Pure 
Land Buddhism.
3 At the same time, the syntactical structure and the word 
2 諸行無常、 是生滅法、 生滅滅己、 寂滅為楽 （諸行は無常なり、 是生滅の法なり、
生 滅 滅し 已って、寂 滅 を 楽と為). ‘All things are in a state of incessant change, this is the 
law of birth and death. When birth and death come to the end one can enjoy the perfect 
enlightment’. Cf. Takakusu (1930: 1, 204).
3 一生是風前之燭。 萬事皆春夜之夢。 （一生は是風前之燭、 萬事は皆春の夜の夢）. 
‘One life is like a light in front of wind, all things are like a dream in a spring night ’. Cf. 
Takakusu (1930: 84, 880).
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
239 
order are clearly Japanese, and as such they offset the strong continental nu-
ances of the text.
Lexical choices should also be considered. In the opening lines of the 
Heike monogatari Chinese vocabulary is limited to eight words, all of which 
come from the religious works cited in the first two couplets. Their presence 
is offset by the juxtaposition of native vocabulary – wago 和語 – based on 
this parallel pattern: 
祇園精舍の鐘の聲、 諸行無常の響あり。 娑羅雙樹の花の色、 盛者必衰のことは
りをあらはす。
K K gen W gen W ,  K K gen W verb.  K K gen W gen W ,  K K gen W verb.
K = Chinese vocabulary ( kango); W = Japanese vocabulary (wago)
The second pair of couplets, however, features native vocabulary only, with 
the single exception of the word gotoshi. This comparative auxiliary is extensively 
featured in kunten materials but never appears in the ornate native prose of the 
tenth and eleventh centuries which uses the expression yō nari やうなり to 
convey the same concept. Here we have the juxtaposition of two expressions 
pertaining to two different linguistic registers, one Sinicized (gotoshi) and one 
native (onaji). Though not identical, they carry virtually the same meaning.
お ご れ る人も 久し か らず。只 春 の 夜 の 夢 のごとし。
たけき者も遂にはほろびぬ、 偏に風の前の塵に同じ。
W W etop W . W W gen W gen W gen K .
W W etop W W . W W gen W gen W abl W .
K = Chinese vocabulary ( kango); W = Japanese vocabulary (wago)
The skilled use of these techniques is what Yamada and other scholars 
praised as the well-balanced literary quality of the Sino-Japanese hybrid prose.
Unfortunately, most definitions of wakan konkōbun rely solely on the 
opening paragraphs of these famous works of literature and fail to investigate 
the linguistic features of this written form as they appear throughout the 
entirety of the texts.
1.3 Wakan konkōbun Features and waka kanbun
As pointed out in 1.1, in its literal meaning of “mixed Sino-Japanese 
writing”, wakan konkōbun indicates any linguistic form that combines clas-
sical Chinese and Japanese in a variety of ways. A proper definition of wakan 
konkōbun and other hybrid forms is key to the formulation of a basic taxonomy 
of the Japanese written language in historical perspective, and as such it tends 
to be a contentious issue.
With the exception of a cluster consisting of utterances in Chinese that 
conformed to the lexical, syntactical, and orthographical conventions of 
valerio alberizzi
240 
continental prose – kanbun – and of their Japanese equivalent – wabun –, it is 
difficult to categorize all Sino-Japanese hybrid forms produced over the centuries. 
The main problems one encounters in the analysis of these texts include 
their large numbers as well as the variety of syntactic and lexical irregulari-
ties within each work. These inconsistencies stem, among other things, from 
such factors as convenience in practical use and varying levels of proficiency 
(or lack thereof) in writing in Chinese. Still, the increased reliance on these 
diatypes helped strengthen the features of the native Japanese language against 
the background of a Sinicized context. 
A more balanced and comprehensive approach to the issue of taxonomy 
would give proper relevance to the two so-called “pure” forms of writing, 
Chinese and native, while considering waka kanbun as a third, independent 
entity, one that played a pivotal role in the development of the written lan-
guage by enabling the exchange of linguistic features between the other two.
As a written form which preserved the visual outline of a Chinese text but 
was very different from it in lexicon and syntax (particularly in word order), 
waka kanbun has found a place in most modern taxonomies of the Japanese 
language, for it showcases the orthographical features of a Chinese script but is 
closer to the native language in phrase structure. Unfortunately the same is not 
true for wakan konkōbun, which has always been considered a linguistic riddle 
to be used at a scholar’s convenience in the formulation of various theories.
As Table 1 shows, a comparison of the main features of these two written 
languages highlights common traits as well as obvious differences.
Table 1. Main Features of waka kanbun and wakan konkōbun
Waka kanbun Wakan konkōbun
Syntax Word order is mainly based on 
kanbun kundoku with the ex-
ception of some passages where 
the word order follows the 
Japanese syntax
Word order is mainly based on 
Early Middle Japanese with the 
exception of some passages where 
it follows Sinicized forms of 
writing
Vocabulary Vocabulary is mainly based on 
Sinicized forms of writing
Vocabulary is based both on native 
and Sinicized forms of writing, with 
a slight prominence of the latter
Use of Sino-Japanese vocabulary 
created in Japan (wasei kango 和
製漢語)
Use of Sino-Japanese vocabulary 
created in Japan (wasei kango 和
製漢語)
Use of formal nouns (keishiki 
meishi 形式名詞)
Use of formal nouns (keishiki 
meishi 形式名詞)
Use of honorific language (kei-
go 敬語)
Use of honorific language (keigo 
敬語)
Use of vernacular expressions
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
241 
Writing 
systems
Pure logographic script Composite logographic and pho -
nogrammatic script
Some characters are used with 
functions that are different 
from old and middle Chinese
Some characters are used with 
functions that are different from 
old and middle Chinese
Honorific auxiliary verbs and 
other elements usually ren-
dered in the text by means of a 
Chinese character
Honorific auxiliary verbs and 
other elements usually rendered 
in the text by means of Chinese 
characters or phonograms
Japanese lexicon is written in 
Chinese characters
Japanese lexicon is written 
both in Chinese characters and 
phonograms
Use of phonograms to record 
words other than people, place 
names or proper names
Compared to the strongly Sinicized tone of waka kanbun, this blend of 
native and continental expressions was certainly easier to read in private as well 
as before an audience. At the same time, as Table 1 shows, Japanized written 
Chinese and Sino-Japanese hybrid writing share more than one feature, which 
may have made it difficult to tell one from the other.
One may say that wakan konkōbun resulted from a native reader’s inter-
pretation of a text in Japanized written Chinese. This interpretation was then 
integrated with a growing number of syntactical, lexical, and orthographic 
Japanese features. Because the Sinicized traits of both forms share as a com-
mon basis the language mirrored in the kunten materials, it becomes difficult 
to tell one from the other. For this reason, the study of kunten materials is 
fundamental in determining the characteristics of Sino-Japanese hybrid writ-
ing, as the following pages will illustrate.
2. The Contribution of kunten Materials to the Studies of wakan konkōbun
2.1 Vocabulary and its Use
As shown in Table 1, the vocabulary of Sino-Japanese hybrid writing is 
based both on native and Sinicized forms.
Ki no Tsurayuki’s 紀貫之 (868-945) preface to the Kokin wakashū 古
今和歌集 (905) provides a case in point. Entirely written in hiragana 平仮
名, this text is often referred to as the first complete document in pure Early 
Middle Japanese, the one that marks the beginning of Japanese poetic criticism 
in the literary circles of the time as distinct from the otherwise prominent 
Chinese poetic forms. However, Japanese scholars have demonstrated that 
valerio alberizzi
242 
the preface is not an original composition, but a sort of adaptation inspired 
by the foreword to the Classic of songs – Shijing 詩経. A closer analysis does 
indeed reveal the presence of a vocabulary used exclusively in the glossed 
readings of Chinese manuscripts.
こゝに、 いにしへのことをも、 哥のこゝろをも、 しれる人、 わづかにひとり、 ふた
り 也 き 。し か あ れ ど、こ れ か れ 、え たるところ 、え ぬ ところ 、たがひになむある。
‘After that there were one or two poets who knew the ancient songs and understood 
the heart of poetry. However, each had strengths and weaknesses’. 
(Saeki 1958: 99; Engl. trans. by Rodd 1996: 43)
そのほかに、 ちかき世に、 その名きこえたる人は、 すなはち僧正遍昭は、 哥のさ
ま は え た れ ど も 、まこ と す くな し 。たとへばゑにかけるをむなを見ていたづらに
心をうごかすがごとし。
‘Among the others, one of the best known of recent times was Archibishop Henjō, 
whose style is good but who lacks sincerity. His poetry is like a painting of a woman 
which stirs one’s heart in vain’. 
(Ibidem: 100 and 43)
大伴のくろぬしは、 そのさまいやし。いはゞたきゞおへる山人の花のかげにやす
めるがごとし。
‘Ōtomo no Kuronushi’s songs are rustic in form; they are like a mountain -
eer with a bundle of firewood on his back resting in the shade of the blossoms’.  
 
              (Ib
idem: 101 and 46)
たとひときうつりことさり、 たのしびかなしびゆきかふともこのうたのもじあるをや。
‘Times may change, joy and sorrow come and go, but the words of these poems are eternal’. 
(Ibidem: 103 and 47)
Adverbs, connectives, and auxiliaries such as tagahi ni たがひに, tatoheba 
たとへば, ga gotoshi がごとし, ihaba いはば, and tatohi たとひ are gener-
ally absent from the court literature of the Heian period, but are frequently 
used in the glossed readings of Chinese texts. While it is difficult to prove 
that their presence in the preface is directly linked to vernacular readings of 
the The Classic of Songs, one may argue that such a vocabulary was at least 
known to the author, who used it almost naturally.
The same introduction features other unique traits, for instance old Japanese 
words with glossed text vocabulary that reveal a close relationship between the 
author and official documents that used a diatype uncommon in everyday parlance.
Tsurayuki is also the author of the T osa nikki 土左日記 (935), a pio-
neering work written in a genuine native style that uses hiragana as its main 
orthographic outline. Even this work, however, is in many ways different from 
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
243 
the great classics of court literature and shows a strong influence of Sinicized 
diatypes both in terms of vocabulary and contents.
といふあひだにかぢとりもののあはれもしらで、おのれしさけをくらひつれば、
はやくいなんとて、 「しほみちぬ。かぜもふきぬべし。」 とさわげば、ふねにのり
なんとす。  
‘[…] while he was reciting the poem, the captain of the boat, a rude man who did 
not know the aware of things, having being paid enough to drink as much as he 
wanted, was anxious to leave immediately. “The tide has risen! The wind is blow -
ing!”, he shouted, going on board’. 
(Suzuki 1957: 30)
こゝろざしあるにゝたり。
‘He seemed to be a well-mannered and kind man’. 
(Ibidem: 31)
あるひとのこのわらはなる、ひそかにいふ
‘The child of one of the passengers bashfully said … ’
(Ibidem: 33)
そもそもいかゞよんだるといぶかしがりてとふ。
‘Tell me, then, what was your poem going to be?”, asked a person eager to hear [the 
child’s poem]’. 
(Ibidem: 34)
Much in the same way as the preface to the Kokinshū, we see here a 
number of adverbs and connectives that were not generally used in tenth- 
and eleventh-century Japanese literary prose. Instead of tagahi ni or hisoka 
ni ひそかに, a text in pure Japanese would make use of such expressions as 
katami ni かたみに, shinobiyaka ni しのびやかに, or shinobite しのびて. 
These words all share the same semantic value, but the last three are better 
contextualized within a native written form. This choice cannot be simply 
explained in terms of a close relationship between the author and the world 
of orthodox Chinese. Moreover, the T osa nikki features traits such as kakari 
musubi 係り結び that pertain to the vocabulary of Early Middle Japanese. 
A comparison with the waka kanbun diaries of noblemen and court officials 
led some scholars to postulate that Tsurayuki attempted to realize a kana 
version of this written diatype, a diatype with which he must have been well 
acquainted (Tsukishima 1981: 389-401). This theory would explain the 
presence of elements of different origins within the same context. After be-
ing properly polished, this prose paved the way for the refined, “pure” native 
written language of a later age.
valerio alberizzi
244 
2.1.1 Contrastive Dimorphic Expressions
The aforementioned passages from Tsurayuki’s writings combine a 
vocabulary frequently adopted in kunten materials with a text written in 
compliance with a Japanese syntax rich in native expressions.
In 1963 Tsukishima Hiroshi 築島裕 (1925-2011), one of the leading 
scholars in the research on the language of kunten materials, identified two 
groups of words specific to a written language form and organized them in 
a systematic taxonomy. Tsukishima conducted a detailed survey on Genji 
monogatari 源氏物語 and Daijionji Sanzōhōshiden  大慈恩寺三蔵法師
伝, two works that epitomized the native and the Sinicized style respectively. 
Daijionji Sanzōhōshiden is a document with glosses dating back to the eleventh 
and twelfth centuries. By comparing the lexicons of these works, Tsukishima 
concluded that the vocabulary of kunten materials and the vocabulary of Early 
Middle Japanese documents can each be categorized in two subgroups. The 
first consists of “characteristic language” – tokuyūgo 特有語, which indicates 
expressions belonging exclusively to either a Sinicized or a native written form. 
The second subgroup, “deployable language” or yōgo 用語, includes expres-
sions which are usually associated with one of the two diatypes but can also 
be deployed in different contexts.
Of course, while the presence of native and Sinicized words in the same 
context may attest to a mixed lexical inventory, it does not tell us anything 
about the intentions of the author. It would be interesting to know whether 
the combination of native and Sinicized words was completely random or 
whether the choice of words followed a certain logic.
A comparison between expressions that, despite being unique to one of 
these written forms, share the same semantic area, would more effectively 
bring to light the differences between a Sinicized and a Japanese context. The 
coexistence of such expressions within the same text would not only attest 
to the existence of a Sino-Japanese hybrid writing but would also provide 
insights as to the intent of the text itself.
Once again Tsukishima’s research provides us with valuable data. As part 
of his survey, Tsukishima identified one hundred and twenty-two expressions, 
all with the same meaning, which are characteristic of Sinicized or native 
diatypes. He named them “contrastive dimorphic expressions” – nikei tair-
itsu hyōgen 二形対立表現. Both Tsukishima (in his later works) and other 
scholars have since cast doubt on the reliability of some of these elements. 
Nevertheless, this group of words is still considered an important starting 
point for researchers. 
Adverbs are a grammatical category that well epitomizes the use of con-
trastive dimorphic expressions in context. These words provide information 
about the manner, degree, place, or circumstances of the activity denoted by 
the element with predicative function. There exists a remarkable difference in 
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
245 
the use of adverbs of state (jōtai fukushi 情態副詞) used to indicate swiftness 
such as sumiyaka ni スミヤカニ (a word typical of kunten materials) and 
the use of the native pair toshi とく and hayashi はやく. The same goes for 
degree adverbs (teido fukushi 程度副詞) that denote a rapidly accelerating 
process such as the Sinicized masumasu マスマス and iyoiyo いよいよ vis-
à-vis the Japanese itodo いとど. 
Let us take a closer look at the former as used in the Heike monogatari.
Throughout the Heike monogatari, sumiyaka ni is used nine times: two 
examples are found in Mongaku’s 文覚 subscription list and in the Heike 
sanmon rensho 平家山門連署, the written petiton addressed by the Heike 
to Enryakuji 延暦寺.
殊には、聖靈幽儀先後大小、 すみやかに一佛眞門の臺にいたり、必ず三真万徳
の月をもてあそばん。
‘And in particular, I ask that the spirits of all who die, whether early or late, high 
or low, may go immediately to lotus pedestals in the true Pure Land of which the 
Lotus Sutra tells, and that they may be assuredly bask in the moonlight of the myr-
iad merits of the three bodies’.
  (Kindaichi et al. 1959: 358; Engl. trans. by McCullough 1988: 180)
これによて或は累代勳功の跡をおひ、 或は當時弓馬の藝にまかせて、 速に賊徒
を追討し、 凶黨を降伏すべきよし、 いやしくも勅命をふくんで頻に征罰を企つ。
‘Consequentely, we have been honored by an imperial command to emulate the il-
lustrious deeds of our forebears and make use of our present martial skills in order 
to swiftly conquer the rebels and bring the evil faction to his knees’.
 
(Ibidem: 90 and 239)
The other sentences containing sumiyaka ni are the following:
一院の御諚に速に追出しまいらせよと候。
‘[…] I have been ordered by the retired emperor to expel you immediately’. 
(Ibidem: 132 and 264)
こはいかに、 昔はむかし今は今、 其義ならば速かに追出したてまつれとて
‘ “Nonsense!” Koreyoshi said. “The past is the past; the present is the present. If that 
is their attidude, we’ll chase them right away now” ’. 
(Ibidem: 133 and 265)
堂 衆 等 師 主 の 命 を そ む い て 合 戰 を 企 、す み や か に 誅 罰（ ち う ば つ ）せ ら る べ き よ し 、
‘The worker-monks are preparing to give battle again in defiance of instructions 
from their teachers and masters. They must suffer swift punishment’. 
(Ibidem: 195 and 86)
valerio alberizzi
246 
昔より、 此所は國方の者入部する事なし。 すみやかに先例にまかせて、 入部の押
妨をとゞめよとぞ申ける。
‘Provincial officials have never invaded these precints in the past,” the angry monks 
protested. “Follow the precedents! End this violent trespass at once!’ 
(Ibidem: 127 and 49)
たとひ報謝の心をこそ存ぜず共、豈障碍をなすべきや。 速にまかり退き候へ。
‘Even if you feel no gratidude, how can it be right for you to obstruct this birth? 
Leave immediately! ’
(Ibidem: 219 and 102)
In the aforementioned examples, the adverb is used to express swift and 
stern orders and we can also assume that its pronunciation was associated with a 
particular tone of voice. In the remaining two examples, sumiyaka ni is adopted 
to portray almost identical situations: when Yorimasa 頼政 hastens his son 
Nakatsuna 仲綱 to yield his own horse to Munemori 宗盛, who demanded it 
insistently; and when Emperor Nijō 二条天皇 orders the wife of the retired 
emperor Konoe 近衛天皇 to enter his court – in this case sumiyaka ni is used 
by her father, the Minister of the Right Kin’yoshi 公能, to persuade her.
たとひこがねをまろめたる馬なり共、 それほどに人のこわう物をおしむべき樣や
ある。 すみやかにその馬六波羅へつかはせとこその給ひけれ。
‘Even if the horse were made of gold, you could not hold onto him in the face of 
such demands. Send him to Rokuhara at once,” he said’. 
(Ibidem: 291 and 143)
既に詔命を下さる。 子細を申にところなし。 たゞすみやかにまいらせ給べきなり。
‘Argument is out of the question, now that the edict has already been handed down; 
you must just go as soon as possible’. 
(Ibidem: 109 and 38)
In both cases, sumiyaka ni is used to emphasize feelings rooted in the 
speaker’s heart, as with Yorimasa’s indignation, which will eventually bring 
him to betray Munemori, or with Kin’yoshi’s regret for the unfortunate fate 
of his beloved daughter.
In other words, in the Heike monogatari sumiyaka ni indicates not only 
swiftness but also a strong resolution usually associated with grudge, griev-
ance, orders, and commands. In this case, pronunciation played a pivotal role.
These words were especially necessary in war tales such as the Heike 
monogatari, a literary genre developed primarily to be recited aloud with the 
accompaniment of music. A particular intonation was probably linked to 
sumiyaka ni, and used to evoke empathy for the characters’ personal stories. 
This is probably one of the distinguishing features that best epitomize the 
so-called “literary quality” of wakan konkōbun.
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
247 
T o express swiftness in letters and correspondence the Heike monogatari 
exclusively deploys the adverb hayaku はやく, which belongs to a native reg-
ister of the language. Hayaku is used only six times: in the letter with which 
Kiyomori 清盛 grants pardon to the Kikai ga shima 鬼界が島 exiles; in the 
sanmon chōjō 山門牃鏐, the petition to Enryakuji penned by the Miidera 三
井寺 monks; in Mongaku’s subscription list; in the Fukuhara imperial edict 
(the Fukuhara inzen 福原院宣); and in the reply sent to the Retired Emperor 
by Munemori 宗盛 on the twenty-eight day of the second month of the third 
year of Juei 壽永. The last example is the complaint against Tadamori 忠盛 
presented by the nobles to Emperor T oba 鳥羽天皇. Since it is reasonable to 
assume that the formal act consisted of a written document, we can conclude 
that hayaku in the Heike Monogatari is purposedly used as a specific word in 
the formal written epistolary language. 
The other native word conveying almost exactly the same meaning as 
sumiyaka ni is toku, the adverbial form of the adjective toshi. 
In the Heike monogatari as well as in other medieval works this adverb is 
used both in its basic form – toku – and its reduplicated one – tokutoku – to-
gether with tō (toku → to + u → tō) and tōtō, the euphonic variants generated 
by deleting the consontant /k/. A perusal of toku’s and tō’s correspondence 
reveals that they appear seven and four times respectively, while tokutoku is 
used twelve times and tōtō thirty-two. The striking difference in use between 
the basic and the reduplicated forms can be explained in the light of the abil-
ity of words to convey rhythm and musicality in texts intended to be recited 
aloud. For example, in the entire text of the Genji monogatari tokutoku is 
used only once; it appears all but four times in the Makura no sōshi 枕草子.
Glosses testifying to the use of toku as a modifier of the variable parts of 
the speech in kunten materials are common, but there are no attested cases 
of the use of the corresponding euphonic variant, tō. 
The difference between the seven sentences using toku and the four con-
taining tō is too small to make a case for a clear distinction in their respective 
uses, although one can say that the former is associated with slightly more 
formal contexts than the latter. The correspondence of tokutoku and tōtō, on 
the other hand, offers an excellent case study for comparison.
T okutoku is used three times as an epistolary term associated with emo-
tional involvement and the transience of human life: in the letters to Koremori 
維盛 from his sons, in the missive for Yorimori 頼盛 from Kamakura, and 
in Nōen’s 能円 message to his wife. In passages adopting direct speech, the 
function of tokutoku as a male expression used in extremely tense and grave 
situations does not change.
とく々頸をとれとぞの給ひける。
‘Just take my head and be quick about it’. 
(Kindaichi et al. 1960: 221; Engl. trans. by McCullough 1988: 317)
valerio alberizzi
248 
たゞ芳恩には、 とく々かうべをはねらるべしとて。
‘I ask only that you cut off my head with as little delay as possible’. 
(Ibidem: 262 and 338)
たゞ御恩にはとく々頸をめされ候へ。
‘The only favor I want from you is a swift execution’.
 
(Ibidem: 389 and 407)
The remaining five examples capture similar situations: the words of 
the kanpaku Motofusa 基房 to the Emperor Takakura 高倉天皇, infatu-
ated with Aoi no mae 葵前; Yoshitsune’s 義経 incitement to the crew upon 
setting sail during a storm; the words of Tsuginobu 嗣信 and Yoshimori 義
盛 to motivate the saliors; Kiyomune’s 清宗 words upon seeing Munemori 
宗盛 parting from his eight-year old boy, Yoshimune 義宗; and the words 
Rokudai 六代 uttered as he was parting from his mother.
Tōtō, on the other hand, is used in relatively ordinary situations, and 
in ten out of thirty-two examples it is used without the modified element.
「 とう 々 。御 房 は 事 あ や ま つ まじ き 人 な れ ば 。」と て ゆ る さ れ け り 。
‘ “You are not the kind of man who creates problems. Go along,” he said’.
(Ibidem: 263 and 127)
「 こゝ に ぶ ゑ ん の ひ ら た け あ り 、とう 々」と い そ が す。
‘We have some “unsalted” finger mushrooms. Hurry up and fix them’.
(Ibidem: 140 and 269)
There is only one exception when tō is used in lieu of tokutoku. Kiyo-
mune’s last words before being beheaded contrast sharply with his father’s, 
who died chanting Amida’s name. This infuses the scene with a remarkably 
emotional aura.
「今はおもふ事なし。 さらばとう」 とぞの給ひける。
‘There is nothing left to worry me now. Be quick about it’.
 (Ibidem: 371 and 396)
As the aforementioned examples indicate, adverbs of state in the Heike 
monogatari were not only selected for their specific linguistic functions but 
also for their musicality.
One can thus postulate that the so-called literary quality of wakan 
konkōbun was characterized by the intentional use of a relatively new group 
of expressions that served a dual function: one merely lexical, and one “con-
textual” and related to the rhythm with which they infused the narration.
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
249 
2.2 Syntax
The coexistence of native and Sinicized vocabulary within the same 
document does not, in and of itself, establish the Sino-Japanese hybrid as 
a mature and complete form of the written language. As mentioned earlier, 
merging a Sinicized context with a Japanese one is an elaborate process that 
involves different degrees of complexity and obeys rules that cannot always 
be easily identified.
T o be on a par with such traditional forms of the Japanese written language 
as wabun, kanbun and waka kanbun, wakan konkōbun must feature specific 
syntactical traits. Once again, research on kunten materials is of great help.
The identification of these traits could be pursued through two differ-
ent channels: one would look at the coexistence, within the same text, of 
syntactical structures characteristic of both diatypes. The other would look 
for new structures born out of the natural merger of the two separate ways 
of expression, structures never before detected in the so-called “pure” forms 
of the written language.
Examples of the latter first appear in literary works produced around 
the early twelfth century such as Uchigikishū and other examples of anec-
dotal literature. The identification of these structures was made possible by 
research conducted on “predicative adverbs” (chinjutsu fukushi 陳述副詞). 
This adverbial category, related to the modal characteristic of the utterance, 
is used to establish a strong, unchangeable agreement with the predicate of 
the sentence to which it is connected and involves the adoption of a fixed 
grammatical pattern – bunkei 文型.
If a native text features a certain grammatical pattern [A … B] and a 
Sinicized text is defined by a fixed correspondence [C … D], then a document 
in Sino-Japanese should feature a concordance between [A … D] and [C … 
B]. When these crossed patterns are present in the same text they testify to 
the high level of completion reached by this written form.
T o offer one example, imada イマダ is an adverb pertaining to a Sinicized 
context that introduces a negative clause ending with the negative suffix zu, 
meaning ‘not… yet…’. Such use is related to the interpretation of the character 
未 found in the vernacular reading of a Classical Chinese text. The function 
of 未 cannot be expressed only with one word, but needs to be rearranged 
in two separate parts of the text. The character is thus read twice: first as an 
adverb, and second as a negative suffix in the sentence. For this reason scholars 
name this group of characters ‘twice-read characters’ or saidokuji 再読字. T o 
help the reader decode the text properly, 未 usually bears two set of glosses: 
one referring to the adverbial reading – usually an i that stands for the i of 
imada –, and one indicating the negative suffix. As a result, when imada is 
used in infinitive and adnominal contexts it is defined by the following two 
patterns: imada … zu shite and imada … zaru. 
valerio alberizzi
250 
However, to express the same meaning early middle Japanese texts such 
as Genji monogatari adopted a completely different pattern, one based on the 
link between the adverb mada and the variant nu of the negative suffix zu, 
according to the two following concordances for the inifinitive and adnominal 
use: mada … de and imada … nu.
Hybrid grammatical patterns of wakan konkōbun are thus defined by the 
crossed concordance of the native adverb mada with the negative suffixes zu 
shite and zaru, and by imada with de and nu.
In the Heike monogatari, imada is used one hundred and fifty-six times 
as opposed to mada, which is used only three times, which hints to a strong 
Sinicized tone as a defining trait of the war tale. A closer look at the sentences 
containing an infinitive pattern shows that in two cases imada is related to zu 
shite and in one with nu according to a hybrid pattern.
いまだともかうもし奉らでをきまいらせて候
‘I have not been able to bring myself to do anything about him yet. He is still here’. 
(Ibidem: 400 and 412)
An examination of the sentences with an adnominal structure yields an 
especially interesting result. Only in eight cases is imada used with zaru ac-
cording to the orthodox Sinicized pattern; in twelve it is used with nu, which 
indicates the prevalence of the hybrid pattern over the native one.
いまだ死期も來らぬおやに身をなげさせん事、五逆罪にやあらんずらむ。
‘I suppose it must be accounted one of the Five Deadly Sins to make a parent drown 
before her time’.
(Kindaichi et al. 1959: 103; Engl. trans. by McCullough 1988: 35)
淀・はづかし・宇治・岡の屋、日野・勸修寺・醍醐・小黑 栖・梅津・桂・大原・しづ
原・せ れうの 里と、あ ぶ れ ゐたる 兵 共 、或 は よろ い きて いまだ 甲を きぬもあり、或
は矢おうていまだ弓をもたぬもあり。
‘Agitated warriors came galloping from places scattered far and wide – Yodo, 
Hazukashi, Uji, Oka no ya, Hino, Kanjüji, Daigo, Ogurosu, Umezu, Katsura, Ōhara, 
Shizuhara, Seiryō no sato: some dressed in armor but not yet wearing helmets, some 
bearing arrows on their backs but not yet carrying bows’. 
(Ibidem: 176 and 76)
いまだ遠からぬふねなれ共、 涙に暮てみえざりければ、 鐔都たかき所に走あが
り、澳 の 方 を ぞ ま ね きける 。
‘Although it had not gone far, he was too blinded by tears to see it. He raced to a 
hilltop and beckoned toward the offing’. 
(Ibidem: 216 and 100)
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
251 
人 の 七 八 は 、何 事 を も い ま だ お も ひ わ か ぬ 程 ぞ か し 。
‘Ordinary children do not reach the age of reason at seven or eight. Alas!’ 
(Ibidem: 320 and 159)
年月はかさなれ共、昨日今日御別のやうにおぼしめして、御涙もいまだつきせぬ
に、 冶承四年五月には第二の皇子高倉宮うたれさせ給ひぬ。
‘Despite the passing of the years, he had continued to feel as though he had parted 
from her only yesterday or today, and his tears were still flowing when his second 
son, prince Mochihito, was slain in the Fifth Month of the fourth year of Jishō’. 
(Ibidem: 401 and 206)
無間の底に墮給ふべきよし、 閻魔の廳に御さだめ候が、 無間の無をかゝれて、 間
の字をばいまだかゝれぬなり
‘It has been decided by the tribunal that the Chancellor-Novice will fall to the bot-
tom of the [Hell of Punishment] Without Intermission [Mugen] […] Enma has writ-
ten the mu of Mugen, but he has not put in the gen [intermission] yet’. 
(Ibidem: 408 and 210)
同廿二日、 新攝政殿とゞめられ給ひて、 本の攝政還着し給ふ。 纔に六十日のうち
に替られ給へば、 いまだ見はてぬ夢のごとし。
‘The new regent, Moroie, was relieved of his post on the Twenty-Second, and his 
predecessor, Motomichi, was reinstated. For Moroie, replaced after a mere sixty 
days, the experience was like an unfinished dream’.
(Kindaichi et al. 1960: 184; Engl. trans. by McCullough 1988: 295)
白葦毛なる老馬にかゞみ鞍をき、 しろぐつははげ、 手綱むすでうちかけ、 さきに
おたてて、 いまだしらぬ深山へこそいり給へ。
‘He put a gold-mounted saddle and a polished bit on an old whitish roan, tied the 
reins, tossed them over the animal’s neck, and drove it before him into the unknown 
mountain fastnesses’. 
(Ibidem: 198 and 303)
行さき未いづくとも思ひ定めぬかとおぼしくて、一谷の奥にやすらふ舟もあり。
‘Others hesitated in the offing beyond Ichi no Tani, as though still unable to setle 
on a destination’.
(Ibidem: 227 and 320)
いまだ卅にもならぬが、老僧姿にやせ衰へ、 こき墨染におなじ袈裟、おもひいれ
たる道心者、浦山しくおもはれけん。
‘[…] a man who resembled an emaciated old monk (though he was not yet thirty), 
dressed in a black robe and a black surplice’. 
(Ibidem: 270 and 343)
valerio alberizzi
252 
是も八嶋へまいるが、 いまだ案内をしらぬにじんじょせよ
‘I am heading toward Yashima myself, but I am not sure of the direction. Be my guide’. 
(Ibidem: 309 and 362)
So far, researchers in Japan have identified the six patterns shown in Ta-
ble 2. While this is an important step in the study of Sino-Japanized hybrid 
syntactical structures, the field is still young and will require more surveys 
in the future.
Table 2. Sino-Japanese Hybrid Writing Grammatical Patterns
native sinicized sino-japanese
pattern I dani…mashite
だに…まして
sura…ifamuya
スラ…イハムヤ
dani…ifamuya
だに…イハムヤ
sura…mashite
スラ…まして
pattern II mada…de
まだ…で
mada…nu
まだ…ぬ
imada…zushite
イマダ…ズシテ
imada….zaru
イマダ…ザル
mada…zushite
まだ…ズシテ
mada…zaru
まだ…ザル
imada…de
イマダ…で
imada…nu
イマダ…ぬ
pattern III yō…nite
やう…にて
gotoku…shite
ゴトク…シテ
yōni…shite
やうに…シテ
gotoku…nite
ゴトク…にて
pattern IV e…de
え…で
… (ni) atawazu 
shite
…（ニ）アタハ
ズシテ
suru koto (wo)…
ezushite
スルコト（ヲ）
エズシテ
e…zushite
え…ズシテ
… (ni) atawa de
…（ニ）アタハで
suru koto (wo) ede
スルコト（ヲ）エで
pattern V nadoka…bekiya
などか…べきや
nadoka…n
などか…ん
ikadeka…bekiya
いかでか…べきや
ikadeka…n
いかでか…ん
ani…nya
アニ…ンヤ
nadoka…nya
などか…ンヤ
ikadeka…nya
いかでか…ンヤ
ani…bekiya
アニ…べきや
ani…n
アニ…ん
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
253 
pattern VI tsuyu…de
つゆ…で
tsuyu…nu
つゆ…ぬ
katsute…kotonashi
カツテ…コトナシ
katsute…zushite
カツテ…ズシテ
tsuyu…kotonashi
つゆ…コトナシ
tsuyu…zushite
つゆ…ズシテ
katsute…nu
カツテ…ぬ
katsute…de
カツテ…で
2.3 Writing Systems
The history of any written language is made more difficult by the nature 
of the writing system(s) used to express such language. In the case of written 
Japanese, the features commonly used to classify the various forms of the 
language tend to be lexical or syntactic. However, scholars rarely distinguish 
between 
‘style’ – buntai – and the orthographic forms conventionally used 
to identify it. In other words, the evolution of the Japanese written language 
as outlined in 1.2 should be presented along with a discussion of the evolu-
tion of the writing systems from kanji 漢字 to kana 仮名. One should point 
out that, the more the Japanese attempted to write entire texts in their own 
language, the more they had to rely on a phonemic script. 
If one follows this approach, a different story emerges. At the beginning 
of its history, Japanese was an unwritten language; writing became possible 
only after the introduction of Chinese characters. Consequently, the first 
written form the Japanese learned was classical Chinese – kanbun. Kanji, 
an orthographic form deeply linked to the language it conveyed, were the 
tools used to express that writing. The tenth century kicked off the process 
of standardization of katakana 片仮名 and hiragana. The latter in particular 
found wide application in wabun, the new, native literary prose court ladies 
used to convey the innermost feelings of the human heart. The emergence 
of new social dynamics and the decentralization of culture in the late twelfth 
century resulted in the creation of a hybrid form of expression that merged 
the formal world of men (revolving around diatypes expressed with the aid 
of Chinese characters) with the lyrical one of women (heavily relying upon a 
pure phonogrammatic system of writing – wakan konkōbun).
For didactical purposes we can draw a parallel between a written lan-
guage and the orthographic forms adopted therein. However, this does not 
mean that variations in the writing systems naturally imply discrepancies at 
a syntactical or lexical level.
For a long time Japanese scholars have argued there existed a relation-
ship between a codified group of writings and the orthographies adopted to 
record them. Such trend is also revealed in the different taxonomies of the 
Japanese language that have been presented since the nineteenth century, tax-
valerio alberizzi
254 
onomies that show a combination of syntactic and orthographic approaches 
in categorizing the different models of classical Japanese. In this respect, the 
Sino-Japanese hybrid writing offers a poignant example of grammatological 
classification of a written diatype because, as far as writing systems are con-
cerned, both wakan konkōbun and kana majiribun 仮名交じり文
4 can be 
understood as “mixed forms of Chinese and Japanese”.
Of course, it was the development of purely phonogrammatic writing 
systems such as hiragana and katakana that boosted the growth of an authentic 
Japanese culture and the flowering of a refined literary prose during the ninth 
and tenth centuries.
With the creation of hiragana and katakana – obtained respectively by 
the cursivization and the reduction of Chinese characters to their elemental 
components – the Japanese language achieved its full potential. Such potential 
was achieved by a multilayered orthography which involved the adaptation 
of a system borrowed from a foreign country combined with two different 
sets of native signs. Still, in its early stages this system was far from efficient 
as a form of expression.
In other words, a variety of systems was used across the social spectrum 
to convey at least three different linguistic diatypes – i.e. Chinese, Japanese 
and Sino-Japanese .
The main issue, then, is to define who and when used which system, as 
well as to identify the addressee and the context and purpose of a text; one 
must also determine whether the adoption of one orthography in lieu of 
another required specific choices at the lexical or syntactic level. According 
to Tsukishima Hiroshi:
The definition used so far has not always been clear, being used to indicate a text that 
mixes wabun with kanbun (kundoku) and, in most cases, adopts kanji kana majir -
ibun as formal orthography. Specifically, wakan konkōbun indicates the style of gunki 
monogatari of the Kamakura period such as the Heike monogatari  and Taiheiki. In 
this kind of writing, based on the syntax of Middle Japanese as seen in wabun  and 
kanbun kundoku materials, numerous Chinese loan words (kango) are used alongside 
late Middle Japanese vernacular expressions; elements of hentai kanbun are also very 
common. In a broad sense wakan konkōbun can be defined as a buntai  that merges 
elements of wabun and kanbun kundoku, although this sort of generalization is not 
always possible. One can say with certainty that kanji kana majiribun is a defini -
tion pertaining to the classification of writing systems while wakan konkōbun  is a 
concept used in the taxonomy of contexts. 
(Kokugo Gakkai 1980: 937-938)
4 The precursor of modern orthography, where Chinese characters are used as seman -
tic elements and supplemented by phonograms for inflections and particles.
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
255 
A survey of the history of written Japanese reveals the presence of em-
bryonic forms of Sino-Japanese hybrids since the very beginning of Japanese 
history. The evolution of wakan konkōbun does not seem directly linked to 
the development of writing systems, as variations in the practice of copying 
texts and manuscripts might have altered the style of a text at surface level.
Some of the texts preserved in the Shosōin 正倉院 testify to the use of 
a mixed semantic-phonogrammatic script since the second half of the eighth 
century. This 748 example is one of the oldest (Sakakura 1969: 17-26; Kotani 
1971: 16-25).
是以祖父父兄良我仕奉祁留次尓在故尓海上群大領司尓仕奉止申
是を以て、祖父・父・兄らが仕へ奉りける次に在るが故に、海 上 の 群 の 大 領 司に
仕へ奉らむと申す。
‘Therefore, being in direct line of descent from my grandfather, my father and my 
brothers who all have served [from generation to generation], I request to be placed 
in active service under the Governor of a district near the sea’. 
(Yamaguchi 1993: 30. The highlighted characters were written in small size)
With the exception of the opening connective, an elementary Chinese 
structure easily reorganized to mirror the Japanese syntax, the entire text is 
written following the Japanese word order and features native lexical features 
such as honorifics. Like a modern text in kanji kana majiri 漢字仮名交じり, 
moreover, independent words are recorded by means of Chinese characters 
that are used semantically, while inflexive morphemes and postpositions are 
rendered by means of small kanji that are used phonetically.
The same strategy is deployed in imperial proclamations – senmyō 宣
命 – or in shintō prayers – norito 祝詞 – where the semantic component is 
usually written with a Chinese character and all inflexive endings are written 
with small Chinese characters used as phonograms and placed to the right 
or center of the main column of the text. This orthographic form, known as 
senmyōtai 宣命体, appears extensively in the Shoku Nihongi 続日本紀 (797), 
in the norito of the Engi shiki 延喜式 (927), and in some private writings 
(Shirafuji 1967: 2).
The theory according to which there exists a correspondence between 
diatypes and orthographic forms may have been influenced by the strong 
visual component of the Japanese script, a script in which each sign reveals 
at a basic visual level the socio-cultural context within which it was adopted. 
Chinese characters were difficult to separate from the language they were 
meant to express; the same holds true for hiragana with the native language 
and for katakana with the Sino-centered variants. Nevertheless, this conven-
tion did not prevent Ki no Tsurayuki, Fujiwara no Michinaga 藤原道長 
(966-1028), Fujiwara no T eika 藤原定家 (1162-1241), as well as several 
anonymous writers from relying on the script they considered best suited to 
the specific context.
valerio alberizzi
256 
The theories of another prominent Japanese scholar, Kasuga Masaji 春日
政治 (1878-1962), may lie behind the interpretation according to which wakan 
konkōbun is a mixture of kanji and katakana, as seen in medieval war tales such 
as the Heike monogatari.
Kasuga is the author of Saidaijibon Konkōmyō saishōōkyō koten no koku-
gogakuteki kenkyū 西大寺本金光明最勝王経古点の国語学的研究, the 
monumental and path-breaking philological study of a copy of the Konkōmyō 
saishōōkyō 金光明最勝王経
5 discovered at the Saidaiji 西大寺 in Nara (Kasuga 
1985). This precious kunten material was produced around 762 and annotated in 
830. Kasuga’s work demonstrates that Konkōmyō saishōōkyō is in fact a character-
by-character rendering of orthodox Chinese. From a grammatological point of 
view, this document showcases the combination of a logographic system – i.e. 
Chinese characters – with a phonogrammatic one (kana) used to integrate na-
tive readings and dependent words.
Based on a study of the techniques used to render a Chinese text into 
Japanese with the aid of glosses Kasuga argued that an embryonic form Sino-
Japanese hybrid appeared since the beginning of the ninth century (Kasuga, 
1983: 246-247).
In other words, according to Kasuga the extrapolation of glosses from the 
interlinear space of the manuscript and the reorganization of their content into 
an independently coherent text gave birth to the Sino-Japanese hybrid writing, a 
writing which then came to full fruition with the war tales of the twelfth century.
The Tōdaiji fujumonkō 東大寺諷誦文稿 from the first half of the ninth 
century shows an intermediate step in this process. Whereas in Konkōmyō 
saishōōkyō katakana script for interlinear glosses is smaller and secondary to the 
main body of the text, in Tōdaiji fujumonkō both logographic and phonetic signs 
are equal in size, just as in the modern language. It would have been natural 
for a monk to use the orthographical form he was more familiar with – i.e. a 
mixture of kanji and katakana – to record annotations and personal thoughts on 
the message he would then deliver to the public. Freed from specific linguistic 
conventions, our monk would naturally use in the same context the expressions 
he deemed best suited to his purpose, mixing native and Chinese vocabulary 
along with a combination of native and non-orthodox Chinese syntax, and 
representing them graphically in a mixture of kanji and katakana.
The religious sphere was undoubtedly a great source of innovation when it 
came to the writing system. Adding vernacular readings to an orthodox Chinese 
text by means of marginal glosses in kana meant a step towards the creation of 
a Sino-Japanese hybrid and toward the introduction of katakana as a special 
purpose script.
5 A translation of the Suvarna-prabhāsôttama-sūtra  by Yijing (635–713), a monk of the 
Tang period (618-907).
the process of sino-japanese hybridization
257 
However, at this stage, the glosses were minor fragments that only par-
tially suggested readings or inflective parts of the speech; the body of the text 
was not coherent as a unit, and the main Chinese script was covered with 
annotations. Also, as mentioned earlier, the combination of logographic and 
phonogrammatic systems is evident in yet another group of texts from the 
late eight century, namely the drafts of sermons and the shintō prayers, which 
opens the door to yet new avenues of investigation.
References
Deal, William E. 2006. Handbook to Life in Medieval and Early Modern Japan. New 
York: Facts On File.
Gregory, Michael. 1967. “Aspects of Varieties Diferentiation.” Journal of Linguistics 
3: 177-197.
Kasuga, Masaji. 1983. “Wakan konkōbuntai no seiritsu.” In Kasuga Masaji chosakushū 
2, ed. by Kasuga Kazuo, 237-278. Tōkyō: Benseisha.
Kasuga, Masaji. 1985. Saidaijibon Konkōmyō saishōōkyō koten no kokugogakuteki 
kenkyū. Tōkyō: Benseisha.
Kindaichi, Haruhiko, Atsumi Kaoru, Takagi Ichinosuke, and Ozawa Masao. 1959. 
Heike monogatari – jō, Nihon koten bungaku taikei 32. Tōkyō: Iwanami Shoten.
Kindaichi, Haruhiko, Atsumi Kaoru, Takagi Ichinosuke, and Ozawa Masao. 1960. 
Heike monogatari – ge, Nihon koten bungaku taikei 33. Tōkyō: Iwanami Shoten.
Kokugo, Gakkai. 1980. Kokugogaku daijiten . Tōkyō: Tōkyōdō Shuppan.
Konakamura, Kiyonori. 1879. “Kokubun no seishitsu narabini enkaku.” Gakugei 
shirin IV, 5: 289-298.
Kotani, Hiroyasu. 1971. “Senmyōtai no seiritsu katei ni tsuite.” Kokugo to 
kokubungaku XLVIII, 1: 16-25.
McCullough, Helen Craig. 1988. The Tale of the Heike. Stanford: Stanford UP.
Mikami, Sanji, and Takatsu Kuwasaburō. 1890. Nihon bungakushi – gekan. Tōkyō: 
Kinkōdō Shoseki.
Miner, Earl, Hiroko Odagiri, and Robert E. Morrell. 1985. The Princeton Companion 
to Classical Japanese Literature . Princeton: Princeton UP.
Ogawa, Eiichi. 2008. Enkyōbon Heike monogatari no nihonshiteki kenkyū . Tōkyō: 
Bensei Shuppan.
Okazaki, Masatsugu. 1962. “Fukushi ‘imada’‘mada’ ni tsuite.” Bungaku, Gogaku  
25: 64-74.
Rodd, Laurel Rasplica. 1996. Kokinshū: A Collection of Poems Ancient and Modern . 
Boston: Cheng & Tsui.
Saeki, Umetomo. 1958. Kokin wakashū , Nihon koten bungaku taikei 8. Tōkyō: 
Iwanami Shoten.
Sakakura, Atsuyoshi. 1969. “Kokugo shiryō to shite no mokkan.” Kokugogaku  76: 
17-26.
Shirafuji, Noriyuki. 1967. “Jōdai senmyōtai bunken kanken.” Kokugo kenkyūshitsu  
6: 1-12.
Suzuki, Tomotarō. 1957. Tosa nikki, Nihon koten bungaku taikei 20. Tōkyō: Iwanami 
Shoten.
valerio alberizzi
258 
Takakusu, Junjirō. 1930. Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 1. Tōkyō: Taishō Issaikyō Kankōkai.
Takakusu, Junjirō. 1930. Taishō shinshū daizōkyō  84. Tōkyō: Taishō Issaikyō 
Kankōkai
Tsubouchi, Shōyō. 1981. “Shōsetsu shinzui.” Chikuma gendai bungaku taikei  1. 
Tōkyō: Chikuma Shobō.
Tsukishima, Hiroshi. 1963. Heian jidai no kanbun kundokugo ni tsukite no kenkyū . 
Tōkyō: Tōkyō Daigaku Shuppankai.
Tsukishima, Hiroshi. 1981. “Tosa nikki to kanbun kundoku.” In Nihon no gengogaku 
7, ed. by Hattori Shirō, Kamei Takashi, and Tsukishima Hiroshi. 385-415. 
Tōkyō: Taishūkan Shoten.
Yamada, Yoshio.  1911. Heike monogatarikō . Tōkyō: Kokutei Kyōkasho Kyōdō 
Hanbaijo.
Yamada, Yoshio. 1914. Heike monogatari no gohō. Tōkyō: Kokutei Kyōkasho Kyōdō 
Hanbaijo.
Yamada, Yoshio. 1915. Kōtei Heike monogatari. Tōkyō: Tōkyō Hōbunkan.
Yamada, Toshio. 1979. “Wakan konkōbun.” In Iwanami kōza Nihongo 10, ed. by 
Ōno Susumu, Shibata Takeshi, 257-277. Tōkyō: Iwanami Shoten.
Yamaguchi, Yoshinori. 1993. Kodai nihon buntaishi ronkō. Tōkyō: Yūseidō.
Yamamoto, Masahide. 1965. Kindai buntai hassei no shiteki kenkyū. Tōkyō: Iwanami 
Shoten.
Yano, Fumio. 1886. Nihon buntai monji shinron. Tōkyō: Yano Ryūkei.