<UN>
© Pieter Sjoerd van Koningsveld , 2016 | doi 10.1163/9789004301979_005
This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons  
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported (CC-BY-NC 3.0) License.
chapter 4
Conversion of European Intellectuals to Islam:  
The Case of Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje  
alias ʿAbd al-Ghaffār
Pieter Sjoerd van Koningsveld
In reflecting on the role learned European converts to Islam may play in inter-
cultural communication and Islamic scholarship, it seems useful to distinguish 
between three main types of conversion. First, there is the permanent conver-
sion, in which the convert acts out of free will and personal conviction and 
believes that he has converted for the rest of his life. In their new status, these 
intellectuals also may acquire completely new audiences and with them new 
chances for a successful intellectual career, especially if they use their talents 
in the service of combatting their old faith. In fact, numerous polemical and 
apologetic writings flew from the pens of these erudite converts who attacked 
their old faith or philosophy of life and defended their choice of Islam. A 
famous case is Fray (“Brother”) Anselm of Turmeda (ʿAbdallāh al-Tarjumān 
al-Mayurqī), who authored his famous anti-Christian pamphlet Gift for the 
Intelligent to Confute the People of the Cross  in Tunis, after his conversion to 
Islam in the latter half of the fourteenth century.1 In fact, this phenomenon of 
learned European converts producing polemical and apologetic writings con -
tinues to the present day, as is amply illustrated by the study of Salah Abdel 
Razaq on neo-Muslim intellectuals in the West; he writes long chapters on 
their contributions to Islamic polemical, anti-Western, and anti-Christian lit -
erature.2 Some of the works of these converted polemicists even enjoy distri -
bution on a worldwide scale, in translations into the major languages of the 
Muslim world. There are, however, some rare exceptions to the majority of 
these polemical erudites. An example is Leopold Weiss, of Austrian Jewish 
extraction, who converted to Islam and adopted the name Muhammad Asad, 
then delved deeply into Arabic and Islamic sources, and ultimately developed 
1  ʿAbdallāh al-Tarjumān al-Mayurqī, Tuḥfat al-arīb fī l-radd ʿalā ahl al-ṣalīb , ed./trans. Mikel 
Epalza (Madrid: Hiperión, 1994), 26–42.
2 Salah Abdel Razaq, Neo-Muslim Intellectuals in the West and Their Contributions to Islamic 
Thought and the Formation of Western Islam  (Leuven: Peeters, 2008), Ch. 5, 229–262, and  
Ch. 6, 263–212.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
89European Intellectuals Converting to Islam: Snouck Hurgronje
<UN>
into an Islamic scholar with a wide recognition, and even translated and com-
mented upon the Qurʾān.3
A second type of conversion frequently observed is forced conversion. Here, 
the intention of the “convert” usually is to return in due time to his/her original 
faith or conviction or even to continue his/her original faith or conviction with-
out any interruption but in secret. This results in the phenomenon of a simu -
lated or fraudulent conversion. During the period of slavery, for instance, many 
enslaved European Christians outwardly converted to Islam under duress. 
Those who were fortunate enough to escape or be ransomed usually reverted to 
their original faith immediately upon returning to their home countries.4
A third type of conversion to be distinguished is the conversion of conve-
nience. This is an insincere form of conversion performed only to obtain cer -
tain interests, like a marriage, access for one’s children to a confessional school, 
access to a certain club or place open to adherents of a particular religion. The 
fraudulent convert who converts out of convenience may have in mind activi-
ties such as espionage, research in the field, love relations, etc. The history of 
European “conversions of convenience” to Islam is promising and deserves a 
profound historical study. The earliest example known to the present author 
dates back to the year 1162, when, according to Arabic sources, two Andalusian 
Christians (probably Arabic speaking “Mozarabs” from Christian Spain), dis -
guised as Muslims, attempted to dig an underground tunnel in Medina, in 
order to steal the bones of the Prophet Muḥammad and bring these with them 
back to Spain. They were unmasked and executed. 5 Another early example is 
the early sixteenth-century Italian traveler Ludovico di Varthema who as a 
“temporary convert” was able to provide an eyewitness report of the Prophet’s 
Mosque in Medina with historical explanations in a language that his readers 
could understand; he described, for instance, Abū Bakr, Muḥammad’s succes -
sor buried next to him, as a “cardinal, who had the ambition to become pope.”6
Each of us can think of some famous examples of a more recent time, like 
Edward William Lane (1801–1876), who undertook research in the first half of 
3 Martin Kramer, “The R oad from Mecca: Muhammad Asad (born Leopold Weiss),” in The 
Jewish Discovery of Islam, ed. Martin Kramer (Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv University, 1999), 225–247.
4 Bartolomé Bennassar et Lucile Bennassar , Les chrétiens d’Allah. L’histoire extraordinaire des 
rénégats. xvie- xviie siècles (Paris: Perrin, 1989).
5 For a detailed report see, among others: al-Samhūdī, Wafā l-wafāʾ bi-akhbār dār al-Muṣṭafā , 
ed. Qāsim al-Sāmarrāʾī (Mecca/Medina: Muʾassasat al-Furqān 1422/2001), 2:431–439.
6 Ludovico di Varthema, The Itinerary of Ludovico di Varthema of Bologna from 1502 to 1508 as 
Translated from the Original Italian Edition of 1510, by John Winter Jones, F.S.A. in 1863 for the 
Hakluyt Society (London: Argonaut Press, 1928), xxxiv.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
van Koningsveld90
<UN>
the nineteenth century into the manners and customs of the Egyptians. Well-
known travelogues of an earlier date, like those of Johann Ludwig Burckhardt 
(1784–1817) and Richard Francis Burton (1821–1890) could hardly have been 
written had they not enjoyed the advantages of temporary conversions. Less 
known is the example of Léon Roches (1809–1900), who would hardly have 
been successful in gathering fatwās in favor of the French colonial administra-
tion, had he not presented himself as a Muslim. He was called “Omar ould 
Roches” by the leader of the Algerian resistance against the French invasion of 
Algeria, Prince ʿAbd al-Qādir, in 1837 after the latter had married him to a 
woman from his entourage and had made him his personal secretary. His mis-
sion to collect fatwās in Kairouan, Cairo, and Mecca, that authorized Muslims 
of Algeria to live under French domination, dates back to the early 1840s. After 
having completed this mission, Roches decided to enter the clergy as a priest 
and involve himself in the mission. After King Louis Philippe convinced Pope 
Gregory xvi that he urgently needed the prolonged services of Roches, he left 
the clergy and was reintegrated into the French army as its chief interpreter.7
The Dutch orientalist Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje (1857–1936) is a special 
case; he accumulated the social and political advantages of a conversion of con-
venience to its fullest extent, during a long period of his active life. His conver-
sion started as a temporary one but happened to develop into a more 
permanent form, though it remained restricted to a segment of his network, 
only. Snouck’s half year stay in Mecca (1884–1885) was, probably, initially con-
ceived by him in the framework of a temporary conversion needed only for 
that stay. It so happened, however, that the further vicissitudes of his life 
incited him to revitalize his “temporary” conversion after the original date of 
its expiration, when, in 1889 he went to the Dutch East Indies and stayed there 
for sixteen years as an official advisor to the Dutch government. There he 
resumed his Meccan Muslim network and expanded it considerably, also 
founding a Muslim family with Muslim wives and Muslim children. Here we 
observe the origins of a double life that continued until his death in 1936. His 
first and by far the most extensive network were his European contacts, includ-
ing many orientalists and other academics, in addition to a long list of officials 
of the Dutch colonial administration. The second network consisted of his 
Muslim contacts, including prominent religious scholars and members of the 
ruling class, mainly from Arabia and the Dutch East Indies.8
7 Jacques Caillé, Une mission de Léon Roches à Rabat en 1845. Documents inédits avec introduc-
tion et commentaires (Casablanca: Kaganski, 1947), 13–14.
8 The previous two paragraphs are a brief summary of my book Snouck Hurgronje en de Islam. 
Acht artikelen over leven en werk van een oriëntalist uit het koloniale tijdperk  (Leiden, 1987),  
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
91European Intellectuals Converting to Islam: Snouck Hurgronje
<UN>
Seventy-five years after his death, it seems quite clear that Snouck’s major 
historical influence lies in his contributions to the formation of a colonial 
Islam policy in the Dutch East Indies. The Republic of Indonesia became the 
direct heir of the Dutch East Indies as they had been created and forged into 
one national state from innumerable smaller political entities during the colo-
nial era. Similarly, the Dutch East Indian Islam policies, as well as the institu -
tions developed for them during the colonial period, became the basis of the 
Islam policies of the Republic of Indonesia after its independence. Jakarta’s 
Ministry of Religious Affairs, for instance, is a direct continuation of the “Office 
of Religion” or Kantor Agama of the colonial era.9  From this perspective, 
Snouck’s Muslim network can be expected to shed light on the colonial pre-
history of modern Indonesia, and especially on the origin of its Islamic poli -
cies and their related institutions. As Snouck’s personal archives are now 
becoming accessible at Leiden University Library, also in digitalized form, this 
is the right time for a first exploration of at least the key people in his extensive 
Muslim network.
Here, one should separate the numerous incidental contacts on the one 
hand from the much less numerous long lasting contacts, on the other hand. In 
the many official capacities he occupied: Advisor of Islamic and Native Affairs, 
first in the Dutch East Indies and later in the Netherlands; Professor of Arabic 
and Islamic Studies at Leiden University; editor of the Encyclopaedia of Islam 
published at Brill; Supervisor of the Oriental Manuscripts Collection of the 
Leiden University Library with the title “Interpres Legati Warneriani”; presi-
dent of the Dutch Oriental Society—in all these official capacities Snouck was 
likely to be approached from many sides by people with some specific interest. 
In the present context we focus exclusively on those long lasting Muslim con -
tacts that occupied a structural place in his biography.
The historical basis of Snouck’s Muslim network was certainly his journey 
to Mecca in the years 1884 and 1885 and his “temporary conversion” to Islam. 
Towards his European network, Snouck was crystal-clear in “defending” his 
conversion as a mere instrument to obtain access to Mecca and be accepted in 
a Muslim society. For instance, in a contemporary letter, dated Mecca, 1 August 
292 pp. with bibliography. This book contains a (slightly) revised version of eight articles 
published in various periodicals between 1980 and 1987. See also the Indonesian edition of 
this book, Snouck Hurgronje dan Islam. Delapan karangan tentang hidup dan karya seorang 
orientalis zaman kolonial (Jakarta: Girimukti Pasaka Publishers, 1989), 312 pp.
9 Compare the work of Moch. Nur Ichwan, “Official Reform of Islam: State Islam and the 
Ministry of Religious Affairs in Contemporary Indonesia, 1966–2004” (PhD diss., Tilburg 
University, 2006).
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
van Koningsveld92
<UN>
1885, he assured his former teacher, the German orientalist Theodor Nöldeke, 
that he regularly visited the Kaʿba, because one could not live in a Muslim 
society without outwardly behaving as a Muslim, “because the days when 
Christians or any other scum could live here in freedom, belong to the past.”10 
And in a later letter to the same teacher, of 27 February 1915, Snouck justifies 
his Islam as follows:
No, my iẓhâr al-islâm [my outward Islamic behavior] has nothing in com-
mon with the theory that in war all means are permitted. The former is an 
intransitive measure [i.e., a measure without an object] that in the worst 
case could harm him who applied it. A measure, in my eyes far more inno-
cent than when one, in a modern society, would partake of the sacraments 
of a church or desire them for one’s children, without attaching to them 
any value. It is that, which I consider personally as blasphemy, but not the 
accommodation to the externals of an intellectually inferior society which 
are necessary in order to be considered there as a human being…. I would 
regard a similar accommodation to Christian ritual as self-evident in the 
society of South-African Boers, who also mistrust someone standing out-
side their religious community and regard him as a wretch.11
On another occasion, Snouck referred to his “temporary conversion” in a more 
indirect way, as follows: “By having studied the theory of Mohammedan law 
and doctrine and prepared myself for entire accommodation to the practice of 
Mohammedan manners and customs I was able to ‘hide in the full light’ as a 
proverbial saying of Java has it, to constantly observe without being regarded 
as observer.”12 Snouck’s own explanations of his Islam towards his European 
network and his European audience are consistent and fit into the social and 
political realities of his time. I see no reason to doubt their sincerity. However, 
a different view was proposed by Jan Just Witkam, who argued that the sincer-
ity of Snouck’s Islamic faith cannot be judged scientifically, but must remain a 
matter between him and his Creator.13 But this view is contradicted by Snouck’s 
10  C. Snouck Hurgronje, Orientalism and Islam: The Letters of C. Snouck Hurgronje to Th. 
Noldeke from the Tübingen University Library (Published by P.S. van Koningsveld, Leiden, 
Faculty of Theology, 1985), 8.
11  Snouck Hurgronje, Orientalism and Islam, 222.
12  Snouck Hurgronje, C. “Some of my Experiences with the Muftis of  Mecca,” in Jaarverslagen 
1934–1940 van het Oostersch Instituut Leiden (Leiden, 1941), 4.
13  C. Snouck Hurgronje, Mekka, vertaald en ingeleid door Jan Just Witkam (Amsterdam: Atlas, 
2007), especially 75 ff.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
93European Intellectuals Converting to Islam: Snouck Hurgronje
<UN>
own numerous and crystal-clear explanations towards his European network, 
as well as by his consistent agnostic convictions that are transparent on many 
pages of his publications throughout his life.
From the Muslim side, Snouck’s conversion to Islam was accepted as genu-
ine and sincere, right from the beginning, by some circles at least. When 
Snouck, after his expulsion from Mecca, feared that mistrust of his conversion 
might have been a cause, an Algerian acquaintance, ʿAzīz b. Ḥaddād, assured 
him that this was not the case, as “you have publicly announced your conver -
sion to Islam and even the religious scholars of Mecca testified to that”  
(“li-annaka ashharta islāmaka wa-ʿulamāʾu Makka yashhadūna bi-dhālika”).14 
In certain circles, however, Snouck’s conversion became controversial. The 
famous Egyptian reformist, Muḥammad Rashīd Riḍā, for instance, once spoke 
of Snouck as “an enemy of Islam and a hypocrite who [falsely] pretended to 
have converted to Islam and had called himself ʿAbd al-Ghaffār; he stayed for a 
while in al-Azhar and went to Mecca where he resided to spy on the Muslims.”15 
(The episode in al-Azhar is historically incorrect. Riḍā may have confused 
Snouck with Ignaz Goldziher, who studied for some time in al-Azhar, but with-
out a prior conversion.) Yet, according to the following Muslim personalities 
and groups who occupy places of pride in his Islamic network, Snouck’s con -
version was accepted as genuine and sincere.
1 al-Sayyid ʿAbdallāh b. Muḥammad b. Ṣāliḥ al-Zawāwī (d. 1924)
One highly influential scholar who consistently confirmed and defended the 
authenticity of Snouck’s Islam until his death in 1924, was the Meccan scholar 
Sayyid ʿAbdallāh b. Muḥammad b. Ṣāliḥ al-Zawāwī whom Snouck met in 1884 
in Jeddah for the first time, even before entering the city of Mecca. Snouck fol-
lowed his courses in the Holy City and stayed in contact with him after that. 
Many years later, after the Turkish revolution and in the period of the rule of 
Sharīf Ḥusayn in Mecca, he was appointed to the highest positions a religious 
scholar could occupy in Mecca, viz. of Shafiʿī mufti and Shaykh al-ʿulamāʾ. It 
was the already-quoted Rashīd Riḍā, who in an article in his Majallat al-manār 
acknowledged that “my friend ʿAbdallāh al-Zawāwī, the mufti of Mecca, who 
14  Letter dated 20 Dhū l-Qaʿda 1302 (31 August 1885) in the Leiden University Library in port-
folio S 32 of Cod. Or. 18097, among the Snouck Hurgronje documents transferred from the 
former Oosters Instituut.
15  M. Rashīd Riḍā, “Ḥālat al-muslimīn fī Jāw a wa-l-iṣlāḥ,” al-Manār 14 (1911), 761–767.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
van Koningsveld94
<UN>
was one of his [=Snouck’s] teachers, believed in the genuineness of his conver-
sion to Islam.”16
According to some contemporary printed Arabic sources, al-Zawāwī had 
been expelled from Mecca in the year 1307/1889–1890 by Sharīf ʿAwn because 
of a conflict that had arisen between them concerning the authenticity of 
Snouck’s conversion to Islam, which Sharīf ʿAwn doubted, but al-Zawāwī 
defended. According to these sources, this forced al-Zawāwī to travel to Java 
(the Dutch East Indies), Malaysia, China, Japan, and India.17 For his part, 
Snouck Hurgronje informs us that al-Zawāwīʼs
intimate connections with Turkish governors and with members of the 
Sherif family who disliked the Grand Sherif Aun, became ever more evi -
dent, so that the latter watched a favourable opportunity to get rid of his 
opponent. Well knowing that such an opportunity could not fail to come, 
Sayyid Abdallah secretly put his private affairs in order, and escaped from 
his birthplace in woman’s garb. For about fourteen years his life was that 
of a wandering scholar; he visited his numerous friends and pupils in 
British India, in the Straits Settlements, in the Dutch Indies, where we 
often met. Wherever he came he was gladly received and entertained by 
his admirers, who in the meantime asked him for fatwâ’s on questions of 
law, and for a couple of years he acted as the official Mufti of the Sultan 
of Pontianak in Borneo, a prince of Arabic descent.18
The extensive collection of al-Zawāwī’s Arabic letters to Snouck preserved in 
Leiden is an eloquent witness of their continuous contacts. These letters were 
written from different places where al-Zawāwī was staying, among others dur-
ing his journeys in Southeast Asia: Singapore, Pontianak, Sukabumi, Yokohama, 
Calcutta, etc. In all of his letters (written in Arabic) which span the period 
1894–1917, Snouck is addressed as “Ḥājjī ʿAbd al-Ghaffār [Effendi], may God 
preserve him” (al-Ḥājj ʿAbd al-Ghaffār [Effendi] ḥafiẓahu Allāh) , preceded by 
various expressions of politeness and appreciation.19 In 1908, after the Turkish 
revolution, he returned to Mecca. In addition to the offices of Shafiʿī mufti and 
16  Rashīd Riḍā, M. “Fatāwī al-Manār (Masāʾ il al-libās wa-l-zayy),” al-Manār 26 (1926), 
416–424.
17  Aḥmad Shiryāf, “al-Sa yyid ʿAbdallāh b. Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ al-Zawāwī Muftī l-Shāfiʿiyya bi-
Makka,” Majallat al-Sāda al-Ashrāf, vol. 11 (without pagination), and the sources men-
tioned there: http://www.alashraf.ws/vb/showthread.php?t=46218.
18  Snouck Hurgronje, “Some of my Experiences ,” 15 f.
19  Leiden University Library, Cod. Or . 8952 A: 1117–1127.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
95European Intellectuals Converting to Islam: Snouck Hurgronje
<UN>
Shaykh al-ʿulamāʾ, he occupied the posts of Raʾīs Majlis al-Shūra, and that of 
Raʾīs Majlis al-Shuyūkh, thus playing a major political role in the period pre -
ceding the Saudi era. He was shot in Taʼif in 1924.
2 Raden Aboe Bakar Djajadiningrat (ca. 1854–1914)
A key person of an entirely different nature was Raden Aboe Bakar, scion of the 
noble Javanese family of Djajadiningrat, who became Snouck’s personal assis-
tant in Arabia and afterwards. Raden Aboe Bakar had studied for five years 
under the guidance of ʿAbdallāh al-Zawāwī, before he became Snouck’s per -
sonal “research-assistant.” He collected most of the vital information about the 
Jawi community in Mecca and about Meccan manners and customs which 
were to form the backbone of Snouck’s book on Meccan life in the late nine -
teenth century. His field work notes are preserved in Leiden.20
At Snouck’s personal recommendation, Raden Aboe Bakar was officially 
connected to the Dutch consulate in Jeddah as translator and information offi-
cer who, among others, was to provide the Dutch consul with information 
needed about the Jawi (i.e., Dutch Indian) community in Mecca.
What had made him so employable was his family connections with the 
Dutch administration in West Java, his connections with the large Jawi 
community in Mecca, and his fluency in several languages required for 
dealing with them, namely Arabic, Malay, Sundanese, and Javanese. From 
then on he served as the leading “native” hand at the consulate, liaising 
between the Dutch consul and the local authorities, both Ottoman and 
Sharifan; translating for visiting pilgrims from the Dutch Indies when 
they called in to register their arrival; and monitoring the activities of the 
Jawi community in nearby Mecca.21
Aboe Bakar was personally involved in preparing Snouck for his conversion 
to Islam in 1884, and his letters dating back to the period 1885 to 1912 22  
20 See my Snouck Hurgronje en de Islam, index s.v. Djajadiningrat, Raden Hadji Aboe Bakar.
21  Michael F. Laffan, Raden Aboe Bakar, “An Intr oductory Note Concerning Snouck 
Hurgronje’s Informant in Jeddah (1884–1912),” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 
155 (1999): 517–542; idem, “Writing from the Colonial Margin. The Letters of Aboe Bakar 
Djajadiningrat to Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje,” Indonesia and the Malay World 31 (2003), 
356–380, especially 358.
22
 Leiden University Library, Cod. Or . 8952 A: 9–13.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
van Koningsveld96
<UN>
witness his conviction of the authenticity of Snouck’s Muslim identity; he 
addressed him, among other titles, as “our brother in God Shaykh ʿAbd 
al-Ghaffār Effendi, may God favor him in both worlds” (“ al-Salāmu ʿalaykum 
wa-raḥmat Allāh wa-barakātuhu bi-l-dawām ʿalā mamarr al-layāli wa-l-
ayyām—yukhaṣṣu bi-hadhā ilā ḥaḍrat saʿādat al-ʿazīz dhī l-majd al-rahīb 
al-adīb akhīnā fī Allāh al-shaykh ʿAbd al-Ghaffār Effendi ballagha Allāhu 
manānahu fī l-dārayn”) (1885). At times, the letters seem to express the subor-
dinate affection of a disciple or of a servant towards his master: “His Highness, 
the unique person of his age, my fountain-head the great scholar ʿAbd 
al-Ghaffār” (“ Haḍrat farīd ʿaṣrihi manbatī l-ʿallāma ʿAbd al-Ghaffār ”) (1891), 
and, in 1897: “His Highness, the most exemplary model, my highest support 
Dr ʿAbd al-Ghaffār, may his rank be increased” (“ Haḍrat qudwat al-amāthil 
ʿumdatī l-aʿlā Dr ʿAbd al-Ghaffār zīda qadruhu”), in 1905: “The most exemplary 
model, his Excellency ʿAbd al-Ghaffār, may his wishes continue to be fulfilled” 
(“Qudwat al-amāthil saʿādatlu ʿAbd al-Ghaffār dāma kamā rāma ”; and, finally, 
in 1909, “ Ḥaḍrat ʿazīzī l-mufakhkham al-ʿallāma Dr C. Sn. ʿAbd al-Ghaffār 
Effendī dāma kamā rāma”).
In the eyes of a close friend like Raden Aboe Bakar, Snouck’s Islam was an 
indisputable and, of course, also a public fact. By his close connections to 
Snouck in Arabia and his family connections in circles close to Snouck’s women 
in Java, Raden Aboe Bakar was also informed in detail about Snouck’s intimate 
life in Arabia and Java, including his women and children.
3 Ḥājjī Ḥasan Muṣṭafā (1845–1930)
A young West Javanese religious scholar Snouck met in Mecca also played a 
major role during the remaining period of Snouck’s life. First of all, during his 
seventeen-year stay in the Dutch East Indies, he assisted him, among others, 
during his field research in the pesantrens or religious schools in Java during 
the early years of his stay, as well as during his following field research in 
Acheh. Both research projects resulted in reports with a major influence on 
Dutch colonial policies. I am referring to the West Javanese scholar Ḥājjī Ḥasan 
Muṣṭafā, who was in his early forties when he met Snouck (then twenty-eight 
years old) in Mecca. Ḥājjī Ḥasan had already returned to his country of origin 
when Snouck joined him in the Dutch East Indies, in 1889.
At my proposal, H. Hasan Moestapha accompanied me in the years  
1889–1891 during some of my journeys through Java, and for an important 
part I owed it to his inappreciable support that I soon was surrounded by 
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
97European Intellectuals Converting to Islam: Snouck Hurgronje
<UN>
a wide circle of Natives from the contacts with whom I soon was able to 
draw the necessary information.23
These are Snouck’s own words, in appreciation of his friend.
Ḥājjī Ḥasan Muṣṭafā was appointed chief penghulu [judge] of Kotaradja in 
Acheh (North Sumatra) in 1892, at Snouck’s recommendation, and regularly 
reported to Snouck about relevant political and military developments in 
Acheh, as is witnessed by a bundle of his letters, usually written from Acheh in 
Arabic to Snouck.24 At his request, Ḥasan Muṣṭafā was transferred to the chief 
penguluship in Bandung some years later, again at the proposal of Snouck. 
Ḥasan Muṣṭafā was a gifted writer on Sundanese manners and customs, as well 
as a composer of Sundanese poetry.
Ḥasan Muṣṭafā’s close contacts with Snouck became the object of polemical 
articles in the Arab press. A long article in the Cairo weekly Misbāḥ al-Sharq 
(29 November 1902, No. 232), written by “one of the prominent Muslims in the 
lands of Jāwah,” asserted, among other issues, that the Dutch government was 
using the services of Ḥājjī Ḥasan Muṣṭafā in order to persuade the local popu -
lation to leave Islam and embrace Christianity. According to this article, Ḥasan 
Muṣṭafā was spreading various heresies among the people of the villages of 
West Java, acting under the direct influence of Snouck Hurgronje by whom he 
was protected personally.
As we shall see later on, Ḥasan Muṣṭafā was personally involved in arranging 
both Snouck’s Islamic marriages to daughters of the West Javanese nobility. 
After Snouck left the Dutch East Indies, Ḥasan Muṣṭafā regularly informed him 
about his five children whom he had left behind in Java, together with his sec-
ond wife. An extensive collection of his letters from this period is preserved in 
Leiden as well. In these letters, Ḥasan Muṣṭafā usually avoided mentioning 
Snouck’s name in a direct manner, in accordance with Sundanese etiquette. 
They nevertheless reflect their intimate, affectionate relationship in which the 
shared Islamic faith is presupposed. This is witnessed by the addresses of his 
letters: “Peace be upon you and God’s blessings” (“ al-Salāmu ʿalaykum 
wa-raḥmat Allāh wa-barakātuhu”) or “Peace be upon us and upon the pious 
servants of God” (“ al-Salāmu ʿalaynā wa-ʿalā ʿibād Allāh al-ṣāliḥīn”); and 
elsewhere:
23  C. Snouck Hurgronje, Ambtelijke Adviezen van C. Snouck Hurgronje 1889–1936. Uitgegeven 
door E. Gobée en C. Adriaanse (‘s Gravenhage: Nijhoff, 1957–1965), 1:180. See also P.S. van 
Ronkel, “Aanteekeningen over Islam en folklore uit het reisjournaal van Dr C. Snouck 
Hurgronje,” Bijdragen Koninklijk Instituut (1942), 311–339.
24
 Leiden University Library, Cod. Or . 18097, Portfolio 16.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
van Koningsveld98
<UN>
Peace be upon you and God’s mercy and blessings. To the point now: We 
already sent you a picture, as a token of friendship and to wish you a happy 
feast and a feast of those who (by their growing age) repeatedly celebrate 
it. Therefore, may you and I belong to those accruing and gaining benefits, 
one year after another, years after years belonging to those who are 
respected (by men) and accepted (by God). Amen. (“al-Salāmu ʿalaykum 
wa-raḥmat Allāh wa-barakātuhu. Ammā baʿdu: fa-qad ṣadarat li-janābikum 
minnā al-ṣāra wa-l-ṣāra tahniʾa wa-muʾānasa bi-al-ʿīd al-saʿīd wa-ʿīd 
al-muʿīdīn fa-naḥnu wa-iyyākum min al-ʿāʾidīn al-fāʾizīn al-ghānimīn ʿāman 
baʿda ʿām, sinīna baʿda sinīn min al-muḥtaramīn al-maqbūlīn, Amīn.”)25
4 Sayyid ʿUthmān b. ʿAqīl al-ʿAlawī (1822–1914)
At the very center of the key people of Snouck’s Muslim network stood the 
well-known Arab scholar of South Arabian (Hadhramī) origin Sayyid ʿUthmān 
b. ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAqīl b. Yaḥyā l-ʿAlawī (1822–1914) of Batavia. From 1889, the year 
of Snouck’s arrival in the Dutch Indies, he was active in the colonial administra-
tion (from 1891 in the official capacity of “Honorary Adviser for Arab Affairs”).26 
Sayyid ʿUthmān’s grandfather ʿAqīl had been the head of the Ḥusaynī sayyids in 
Mecca. He was killed around the year 1850 in the prison of the Grand Sharīf of 
Mecca. Sayyid ʿUthmān himself was born in Batavia, but spent a good part of 
his youth in Hadramawt and in Mecca. Both in his country of origin and in 
Mecca he had studied under the most famous teachers. After returning to Java, 
he gave courses in Islamic jurisprudence and theology in the city of Batavia. 
25  The letters dating from the period 1894–1911 are in Leiden University Library, Cod. Or. 
8952 A, 713, and 735–738.
26 There are many references to the life and work of Sayyid ʿUthmān in Snouck Hurgronje’s 
works. See the indices of his Verzamelde Geschriften en his Adviezen. In recent years, sev-
eral articles were published on aspects of his biography, among which I mention here Azri 
Azyumardi, “A Hadhrami Religious Scholar in Indonesia: Sayyid ῾Uthmân,” in Hadhrami 
Traders, Scholars and Statesmen in the Indian Ocean 1750s–1960s, ed. U. Freitag and  
W.G. Clarence-Smith (Leiden: Brill, 1997), 249–263. N.J.G. Kaptein, “Arabophobia and 
Tarekat: How Sayyid ῾Uthmân Became Advisor to the Netherlands Colonial 
Administration,” in The Hadhrami Diaspora in Southeast Asia: Identity Maintenance or 
Assimilation?, ed Ahmed Ibrahim Abushouk, Hassan Ahmed Ibrahim (Leiden/Boston: 
Brill, 2009), 33–44. Recently, N.J.G. Kaptein published his biography of Sayyid ʿUthmān, 
entitled Islam, Colonialism and the Modern Age in the Netherlands East Indies: A Biography 
of Sayyid ʿUthman (1822–1914) (Leiden: Brill, 2015), containing a special chapter on Sayyid 
ʿUthmān’s relations with Snouck Hurgronje (103–140).
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
99European Intellectuals Converting to Islam: Snouck Hurgronje
<UN>
Sayyid ʿUthmān was a gifted and highly productive scholar who published an 
extensive series of smaller writings, especially fatwās, on his own lithographic 
press. Snouck Hurgronje regularly relied upon him in many of his advices to the 
colonial authorities. He occasionally referred to these materials in his pub -
lished studies, in which he discussed his views on various aspects of modernity 
and the use of modern techniques in a religious context, for instance on the use 
of the phonograph for registering and reproducing recitals of the Qurʾān.
Innumerable times, Sayyid ʿUthmān proved his use as an ally of the Dutch 
East Indian government, among others when he passed on to Snouck in 1894 a 
fatwā of the mufti of Johor. In it, the mufti proved from Islamic sources that the 
Achehnese should stop fighting against the Dutch, because of the great dam -
age that would be done to Islam and Muslims if they continued the war.27 
Sayyid ʿUthmān’s staunch support of Dutch rule comprised, among others, the 
text of a supplication or duʿāʾ composed by him for the Dutch Queen 
Wilhelmina at the occasion of her eighteenth birthday, when she was able to 
relieve her mother, the Queen Mother Emma, who had acted as her regent of 
the Dutch Empire.28 This prayer was to be read in all the mosques of the Dutch 
East Indies. It in fact provoked extensive polemical reactions. It is not surpris-
ing that the Egyptian reformist Rashīd Riḍā incidentally found occasion to 
criticize Sayyid ʿUthmān as an opponent of his reforms.29
Sayyid ʿUthmān’s letters to Snouck in Leiden date back to the years 1886 and 
1888, shortly after Snouck’s return to the Netherlands from Arabia. In these 
earliest letters, he addresses Snouck as “Mister Snouck Hurgronje” (“al-Khawāja 
Snouck Hurgronje”) (1886) and as “Dr Snouck Hurgronje” (“al-Duktūr Snouck 
Hurgronje”). In these earliest letters he draws Snouck’s attention to his own 
publications and to the place of authority he occupies among the native 
Muslims in Jāwa who consult him in their religious and legal difficulties. He 
refers to the assistance he occasionally lent to the Dutch authorities when they 
wanted to investigate the mystical brotherhoods, and asks Snouck to recom -
mend him for the official position of advisor or “mufti.” As we saw earlier, after 
Snouck’s arrival in the Indies, in 1889, Sayyid ʿUthmān in fact did become his 
right hand, in the position of “Honorary Advisor of Arab Affairs.”
27  Sālim b. Aḥmad b. Muḥsin b. Bū Bakr al-ʿAṭṭās, Risālat al-taslīm wa-l-qitāl wa-l-radd ʿalā 
man aftā bi-ghayri istidlāl , privately owned manuscript in the Netherlands. A photocopy 
is in the possession of the present author.
28 A full study is provided by Nico J .G. Kaptein, “The Sayyid and the Queen: Sayyid ῾Uthmân 
on Queen Wilhelmina’s Inauguration on the Throne of the Netherlands in 1898,” Journal 
of Islamic Studies 9, no. 2 (1998): 158–177.
29 Rashīd Riḍā, “Ḥālat al-muslimīn fī Jāw a.”
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
van Koningsveld100
<UN>
When Snouck returned to Leiden, and thus after having known him person-
ally for many years in the Dutch East Indies, Sayyid ʿUthmān addressed him as 
follows: “His Highness, the venerable, most beloved and profound friend 
Professor ʿAbd al-Ghaffār, may his fame and honor endure, his days be fruitful 
and the signs (of his prestige) be advanced. Amen” (“ Ḥaḍrat al-mukarram 
al-muḥibb al-adwam wa-l-ṣāḥib al-aḥkam al-Profīsūr ʿAbd al-Ghaffār dāma 
ʿizzuhu wa-ijlāluhu wa-ṭābat ayyāmuhu wa-aʿlā aʿlāmuhu—Amīn ”) (1906), and 
in 1909 as follows:
I convey many greetings and express deep appreciation (informing you 
that there is nothing like the longing to see a noble friend, for whom there 
is no substitute), to his Esteemed Highness, both in essence and in prop-
erties, our beloved companion Professor ʿAbd al-Ghaffār, may his honor 
endure and his rank be increased, and his prestige raise high in regions 
zand cities (“Ahdī al-salām al-jazīl wa-l-thanāʾ al-jamīl (maʿa al-inbāʾ bi-
anna al-shawq ilā ruʾyat al-ṣadīq al-nabīl laysa lahu mathīl ḥaythu lam 
yūjad lahu badīl) ilā ḥaḍrat al-ʿazīz dhātan wa-ṣifātan muḥibbinā 
wa-anīsinā al-Profīsūr ʿAbd al-Ghaffār; dāma ʿizzuhu wa-zīda qadruhu 
wa-ʿalā ṣītuhu fī al-aqṭār wa-al-amṣār”).
5 Women30
A selective analysis of the key persons of Snouck’s Muslim network must pay 
some special attention to the role of women in Snouck’s life in Mecca and the 
Dutch East Indies. As we presently see, these women are likely to have strength-
ened his social position considerably.
During his stay in Mecca, Snouck succeeded in buying an Ethiopian slave 
girl with whom he lived together and to whom he incidentally referred as his 
“family” (between inverted commas) and whose name has remained unknown, 
so far. Snouck praised her, among others, by stating that “fortunately she does 
not show any of the unpleasant peculiarities of which her race is sometimes 
accused. It is a fact,” Snouck continued,
30  The contents of this paragraph are a brief extract of the more extensive data provided in 
my book Snouck Hurgronje en de Islam , especially Ch. 5, 131–142, mainly based on my 
interviews of Snouck’s descendants in Bandung, in January 1983. The extract is preceded 
by the new information concerning Snouck’s Ethiopian slave girl in Mecca, which was 
provided for the first time by Jan Just Witkam, in the introduction to his Dutch translation 
of Snouck’s Mekka (2007).
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
101European Intellectuals Converting to Islam: Snouck Hurgronje
<UN>
that the experts here prefer the good Abyssinian girls over the daughters 
of the people [of Mecca], to the great irritation of the latter. From my 
part, I decided to follow this example mainly because each day my knowl-
edge about the excessive demands and the devilish tricks of the daugh -
ters of the Holy City is increased, and also because I am able to inform 
myself about their life and customs without involving myself into more 
intimate ties with them.
In the Dutch East Indies, many Dutchmen lived with indigenous concubines. 
Their mixed descendants constituted the specific social group of the so-called 
“Indos.” Often, a Dutchman would leave his concubine with their children 
behind in the Dutch Indies, when, at the completion of his service, he repatri-
ated to the Netherlands. The case of Snouck’s Islamic marriages with daughters 
of the Javanese aristocracy was different in some important aspects, but simi -
lar in other aspects. Shortly after his arrival in Java, he married the daughter, 
Sangkana, of the local chief panghulu (or chief qāḍī) of Ciamis, Raden Ḥājjī 
Muḥammad Ṭāʾib. She gave him four children, Salmah Emah, Oemar, Aminah, 
and Ibrahim. She died in 1896, when she had a miscarriage of a fifth child. Press 
articles that soon appeared in Dutch Indian newspapers of early 1890 accused 
Snouck of cheating the local population and demanded appropriate measures 
from the government. These articles stated that the marriage had been con -
cluded in the Friday Mosque of the town. Snouck denied the reports in writing, 
as did the governor general of the Dutch East Indies.
A second Islamic marriage was concluded by Snouck in 1898, with Siti 
Sadijah, then thirteen years old, the only daughter of Raden Ḥajjī Muḥammad 
Soeʾèb, vice-panghulu at Bandung, who was known, among others things, as a 
gifted reciter of the Qurʾān on ʿId al-Fiṭr in its Friday Mosque. From this mar-
riage was born one son, Joesoef, in 1905, whom I visited in Bandung in the 
1980s. He confided to me the story of Snouck’s Muslim families, which, until 
then, had been kept strictly secret in the Netherlands. When Snouck left for the 
Netherlands in 1906 he had made financial arrangements for the maintenance 
of his children and second wife, while Ḥājjī Ḥasan Muṣṭafā, who had been the 
marriage-maker in both cases, kept an eye on them and informed Snouck 
about their vicissitudes.
 Conclusion
Snouck’s conversion of convenience  was perhaps the most successful case in 
colonial history of the instrumentalization of Islam for the benefit of the 
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
van Koningsveld102
<UN>
Islamic policies of the rulers and for the development of ethnological field 
studies. The second volume of Snouck’s book on Mecca, dealing with the 
daily life of Mecca, could not have been completed without it, even though 
much of the data were gathered after his departure from the Holy City by his 
assistant Raden Aboe Bakar. Snouckʼs major books on the Achehnese as well 
as the Gayonese, could not have been written without the advantages of his 
conversion, neither could he have given the great majority of his advice to the 
colonial government. The key people of his Muslim network, each in their 
own sphere of influence, contributed considerably, not only in establishing 
and consolidating his social position within Muslim circles, but they also con-
tributed to his authority among Muslims of the Indonesian archipelago at 
large. He soon acquired the prestige of a Muslim religious scholar himself. 
Whoever understands the social impact of a network like that of Snouck can-
not be surprised at all to find petitions in his archive addressed to him in 
Batavia as “the Mufti of Batavia,” “Muftī Jāwa” (= the mufti of the Dutch 
Indies), and even as “Shaykh al-Islām fī l-Diyār al-Jāwiyya.” 31 All of these 
addresses are reflections of the widespread recognition of Snouck as a Muslim 
and indeed as a Muslim scholar, as sanctioned by a wide range of Muslim 
scholars of the highest rank.
 Bibliography
Archival Sources
Leiden University Library, Cod. Or. 8952A: Private Letter Archive of Snouck Hurgronje.  
All documents referred to from this archive in the present article are now online 
and accessible through the catalogue of the Leiden University Library.
Leiden University Library, Cod. Or. 18097: Archive of Snouck Hurgronje, in 65 portfo -
lios. Documents referred to from this archive in the present article are not (yet) 
accessible online.
 Secondary Sources
Abdel Razaq, Salah. Neo-Muslim Intellectuals in the West and Their Contributions to 
Islamic Thought and the Formation of Western Islam: An Exploratory Investigation of 
the Religious and Literary Activities of Western Neo-Muslim Intellectuals. Leuven: 
Peeters, 2008.
31  Leiden University Library, Cod. Or . 18097, Portfolio 1.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
103European Intellectuals Converting to Islam: Snouck Hurgronje
<UN>
Azyumardi, Azri. “A Hadhrami Religious Scholar in Indonesia: Sayyid ῾Uthmân.” In 
Hadhrami Traders, Scholars and Statesmen in the Indian Ocean 1750s–1960s, edited 
by U. Freitag and W.G. Clarence-Smith, 249–263. Leiden: Brill, 1997.
Bennassar, Bartolomé and Lucile Bennassar. Les chrétiens d’Allah. L’histoire extraordi-
naire des rénégats. XVIe–XVIIe siècles. Paris: Perrin, 1989.
Caillé, Jacques. Une mission de Léon Roches à Rabat en 1845 . Documents inédits avec 
introduction et commentaires. Casablanca: Kaganski, 1947. (= « Publications de 
l’Institut des Hautes-Etudes Marocaines », tome 43).
Kaptein, Nico J.G. “Arabophobia and Tarekat: How Sayyid ῾Uthmân Became Advisor to 
the Netherlands Colonial Administration.” In The Hadhrami Diaspora in Southeast 
Asia: Identity Maintenance or Assimilation? , edited by Ahmed Ibrahim Abushoul, 
Hassan Ahmed Ibrahim, 33–44. Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2009.
Kaptein, Nico J.G. Islam, Colonialism and the Modern Age in the Netherlands East Indies: 
A Biography of Sayyid ʿUthman (1822–1914). Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2014.
Kaptein, Nico J.G. “The Sayyid and the Queen: Sayyid ῾Uthmân on Queen Wilhelmina’s 
Inauguration on the Throne of the Netherlands in 1898.” Journal of Islamic Studies 9, 
no. 2 (1998): 158–177.
Koningsveld, P.S. van. Snouck Hurgronje en de Islam . Acht artikelen over leven en werk 
van een oriëntalist uit het koloniale tijdperk. Leiden, 1987.
Koningsveld, P.S. van. Snouck Hurgronje dan Islam. Delapan karangan tentang hidup dan 
karya seorang orientalis zaman kolonial. Jakarta: Girimukti Pasaka Publishers, 1989.
Kramer, Martin. “The Road from Mecca: Muhammad Asad (born Leopold Weiss).” In 
The Jewish Discovery of Islam , edited by Martin Kramer, 225–247. Tel Aviv: Tel Aviv 
University, 1999.
Laffan, Michael F. “Raden Aboe Bakar: An Introductory Note Concerning Snouck 
Hurgronje’s Informant in Jeddah (1884–1912).” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde 155 (1999): 517–542.
Laffan, Michael F. “Writing from the Colonial Margin. The Letters of Aboe Bakar 
Djajadiningrat to Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje.” Indonesia and the Malay World 31 
(2003): 356–380.
Ludovico di Varthema. The Itinerary of Ludovico di Varthema of Bologna from 1502 to 
1508 as Translated from the Original Italian Edition of 1510, by John Winter Jones, F.S.A. 
in 1863 for the Hakluyt Society. London: Argonaut Press, 1928.
al-Mayurqī, ʿAbdallāh al-Tarjumān. Tuḥfat al-arīb fī l-radd ʿalā ahl al-ṣalīb. Edited and 
translated by Mikel Epalza. Madrid: Hiperión, 1994.
Nur Ichwan, Moch. “Official Reform of Islam: State Islam and the Ministry of Religious 
Affairs in Contemporary Indonesia, 1966–2004.” PhD dissertation, Tilburg University, 
2006.
Rashīd Riḍā, M. “Fatāwī al-Manār (Masāʾil al-libās wa-l-zayy).” al-Manār 26 (1925), 
416–624.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access
van Koningsveld104
<UN>
Rashīd Riḍā, M. “Ḥālat al-muslimīn fī Jāwa wa-l-iṣlāḥ.” al-Manār 14 (1911), 761–764.
Ronkel, P.S. van. “Aanteekeningen over Islam en folklore uit het reisjournaal van  
Dr C. Snouck Hurgronje.” Bijdragen Koninklijk Instituut (1942), 311–339.
Sālim b. Aḥmad b. Muḥsin b. Bū Bakr al-ʿAṭṭās. Risālat al-taslīm wa-l-qitāl wa-l-radd ʿalā 
man aftā bi-ghayri istidlāl. Privately owned manuscript. A photocopy is in the pos -
session of the present author.
al-Samhūdī. Wafā l-wafāʾ bi-akhbār dār al-Muṣṭafā . Edited by Qāsim al-Sāmarrāʾī.  
5 vols. Mecca/Medina: Muʾassasat al-Furqān, 1422/2001.
Shiryāf, Aḥmad. al-Sayyid ʿAbdallāh b. Muḥammad Ṣāliḥ al-Zawāwī Muftī l-Shāfiʿiyya 
bi-Makka. Majallat al-Sāda al-Ashrāf, vol. 11. Available online: http://www.alashraf 
.ws/vb/showthread.php?t=46218.
Snouck Hurgronje, C.- Ambtelijke Adviezen van C. Snouck Hurgronje 1889–1936. 
Uitgegeven door E. Gobée en C. Adriaanse . 3 vols. ‘s Gravenhage: Nijhoff, 1957–1965  
(’s Rijks Geschiedkundige Publicatiën 33–35).
Snouck Hurgronje, C. Mekka vertaald en ingeleid door Jan Just Witkam. Amsterdam: 
Atlas, 2007.
Snouck Hurgronje, C. Orientalism and Islam: The Letters of C . Snouck Hurgronje to Th. 
Noldeke from the Tübingen University Library.  Published by P.S. van Koningsveld. 
Leiden, Faculty of Theology, 1985.
Snouck Hurgronje, C. “Some of my Experiences with the Muftis of Mecca.” In 
Jaarverslagen 1934–1940 van het Oostersch Instituut Leiden. Leiden, 1941.
Bekim Agai, Umar Ryad and Mehdi Sajid - 9789004301979
Downloaded from Brill.com12/03/2018 01:22:01AM
via free access