1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  105 
 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA 
(ANALYSIS OF EXISTING THEORIES) 
Aswan1, Suhardi2  
1 FITK Jurusan MPI Institut Agama Islam Daar A Uluum (IAIDU)Asahan ; aswan@iaidu-asahan.ac.id  
2 FITK Jurusan MPI Institut Agama Islam Daar A Uluum (IAIDU)Asahan; suhardi@iaidu-asahan.ac.id  
 
ARTICLE INFO  ABSTRACT 
Keywords: 
keyword 1; Development 
keyword 2; Islam 
keyword 3 Indonesia 
 
 
 
 To study the development of Islam in Indonesia, one should 
know various events in sequence starting from the beginning 
of the arrival of Islam, the acculturation of cultures, the 
formation of communities to form empires and various other 
developments sequentially. With this it will make it easier to 
understand how the long history of the process of entry and 
development of Islam in Indonesia. 
Islam entered and was later accepted by the people of the 
Archipelago, having an influence on the previous 
civilization, namely Hindu -Buddhism. The entry of Islam 
formed a tradition that comb ined Islamic culture with local 
traditions that had existed beforehand. This amalgamation of 
cultures is referred to as cultural acculturation, which means 
that Islamic practices accult urate (mix and complement both) 
with the local culture. The existence of cultural acculturation 
between Islam and local  culture facilitated the spread of 
Islam because Islam was easi ly accepted among the people at 
that time. This cultural acculturation includes aspects of life 
such as social, traditional ceremonies, and also art, all of 
which have a big impact on society. 
This paper contains an analysi s of several discussions, 
namely regarding: the arrival of Islam in Indonesia, various 
theories about the arrival of Islam in Indonesia, an analysis of 
the theories of the arrival of Islam in Indonesia and the 
development of Islam in Indonesia. 
Article history: 
Received 2022-11-25 
Revised  2022-11-29 
Accepted 2022-12-01 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-SA license. 
 
Corresponding Author: 
Aswan1, Suhardi2  
1 FITK Jurusan MPI Institut Agama Islam Daar Al Uluum (IAIDU)Asahan ; aswan@iaidu-asahan.ac.id  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Before the entry of Islam into Indonesia, there were already various 
civilizations that developed in various regions of the archipelago. These 

1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  106 
 
civilizations consist of Hindu -Buddhist culture originating from India. 
Although the distribution is not evenly d istributed, it has given a cultural 
influence that is inherent in the people of the archipelago. Islam entered 
Indonesia through several stages, then evolved, and has various variations. 
Various discussions have been carried out by experts to date about th e entry of 
Islam into Indonesia. Problems regarding the entry of Islam into Indonesia 
cover various historical and sociological aspects, for example relating to the 
history and early development of Islam. There are three basic problems that 
become differen ces between experts, namely: the place where Islam first 
entered Indonesia, the carrier of Islam, and the time of arrival. In its 
development, Islam provides various advances in several aspects. This 
happened influenced by the trade carried out by traders who came from 
Arabia, China, India and Persia. With trade activities that crossed various 
regions, Islam entered and spread through ports which were then spread by 
means of marriage, education, various arts, da'wah activities and also politics. 
Islam entered and was later accepted by the people of the Archipelago, 
having an influence on the previous civilization, namely Hindu -Buddhism. The 
entry of Islam formed a tradition that combined Islamic culture with local 
traditions that had existed beforehand. This  amalgamation of cultures is 
referred to as cultural acculturation, which means that Islamic practices 
acculturate (mix and complement both) with the local culture. The existence of 
cultural acculturation between Islam and local culture facilitated the spr ead of 
Islam because Islam was easily accepted among the people at that time. This 
cultural acculturation includes aspects of life such as social, traditional 
ceremonies, and also art, all of which have a big impact on society. 
This paper contains an analysis of several discussions, namely regarding: 
the arrival of Islam in Indonesia, various theories about the arrival of Islam in 
Indonesia, an analysis of the theories of the arrival of Islam in Indonesia and the 
development of Islam in Indonesia. 
METHODS  
As for the approach in this writing using a literature review . The 
bibliographical method is a type of qualitative research method in which the 
location and place of research is carried out in libraries, documents, archives, 
and the like. In the words of N yoman Kutha Ratna, the library method is a 
research method in which data collection is carried out through places where 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  107 
 
research results are stored, namely libraries.  (Prastowo 2016) . This research is 
essentially a library research. This means that research is a literature study 
whose data is taken from written materials, either in the form of books or other 
related topics. The contents of a literature study can be in the form of a 
theoretical study who se discussion is focused on information about the 
problems to be solved through research. (Sukardi 2003). 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
1. The arrival of Islam in Indonesia 
The entry of Islam into Indonesia was carried out in a peaceful 
manner. (Azra 1999) . The spread of Islam could not be separated from 
the role of traders which were then also carried out by preachers and 
Sufi travelers. There is no historical record in the form of an inscription 
about the  role of traders in spreading Islam. Therefore, it becomes a 
natural thing if there are various differences of opinion and theories 
about the time and place of the entry of Islam into the archipelago. 
According to Juned Parinduri there is a tomb in the Bar us Tapanuli 
area which is inscribed with the number of the year Haa -Mim which 
means 670 AD or 48 H. Based on this, it can be seen that Islam has 
entered the archipelago, to be precise, the Barus Tapanuli area in 670 AD. 
(Hasbullah 1996). 
The process of Islamization in Indonesia is very important in 
historical studies. According to Ricklefs, there may be two ways to 
spread Islam in Indonesia. first, the indigenous population associated 
with Islam and then converted to Islam. Second, there are A sian 
foreigners (Chinese, Indian, Arab, etc.) who are Muslim and then settle 
in the territory of Indonesia and have marriages with local residents who 
then follow the local culture so that they become Malay, Javanese, or 
have entered and joined the ethnic group. -certain tribes. (Ricklefs 1994). 
The process of Islamization in Indonesia can be seen in the following 
ways: 
a. The existence of public relations in the archipelago with traders 
and sailors who come from Arabia. 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  108 
 
b. There is community relations in the archipelago with traders who 
have embraced Islam who come from Arab, Gujarat, Persian and 
others. 
c. There is gradual socialization of Islam in the archipelago 
d.  The peak of the development and growth of the Islamic religion 
occurred with the existence of an Islamic sultanate which controlled the 
economy. 
e. Relations with traders from Europe. 
f. The domination and hegemony of the European nations followed by the 
decline and disappearance of Indonesian Islam from a political and 
economic perspective. 
From some of the explanations above, it can be concluded that the 
spread of Islam in Indonesia was carried out through trade routes and 
political activities. (Azra 2004). 
 
2. Theories of the Arrival of Islam in Indonesia 
To find out the entry and development of Islam in Indonesia, one must first 
know the various processes that have been passed coherently starting from the 
initial arrival of Islam, the process of its spread which influenced various local 
cultures and then formed a distinctive Islamic tradition that was acculturated 
with local culture. Azyumardi Azra said that historians have different opinions 
about the entry of Islam into Indonesia. These differences include the place 
where Islam first en tered Indonesia, the carriers of Islam to Indonesia and the 
time of arrival of Islam to Indonesia. 
Discussions and various polemics during the period when Islam entered 
Indonesia heated up during the New Order (ORBA) period. This happened 
between Islamic h istorians and the "palace historians". The background of the 
thoughts of the abangan during the ORBA era which seemed to be hostile to 
Islam until the mid -1980s eroded the role of Islam in the study of Indonesian 
history. This can be seen from the existenc e of actions to maintain the 
imagination of Hindu greatness by making propaganda saying that the 
development of Islam in previous centuries was united by the Palapa Oath. It is 
this propaganda that makes the conversation about the entry of Islam warm. 
The propaganda also presents a concept which says that the early entry of Islam 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  109 
 
into Indonesia occurred in the 13th century and denies the development of 
Islam in earlier times. Furthermore, the Budi Utomo Movement was 
inaugurated as National Awakening Day on May 20 every year. Historical 
records explain that up to the congress held in Solo in 1931 this organization 
limited its members to only Javanese aristocrats and opposed the spirit of 
Indonesian unity while maintaining Javanese thinking. This movement 
eventually disbanded because it was triggered by a discrepancy with the 
thinking of the times. On the other hand, there is a group called Sarekat Islam 
which is massive and has millions of members nationally throughout Indonesia. 
This movement held its first c ongress on 17 -24 June 1916 in Bandung. This 
movement socialized the motto "national" and as a pioneer of demands for an 
independent Indonesia. (Hasbullah 2012). 
The various discussions and debates that took place in expert discussions 
about who came first to bring Islam to Indonesia, an d theories regarding the 
area that became the beginning of the arrival of Islam in Indonesia, are 
inseparable from the existence of various routes in trade and shipping to 
various parts of Indonesia pioneered by merchants and Sufis. Traders and Sufis 
who traveled to various parts of Indonesia, some of whom settled and married 
native peoples. The existence of this marriage created a cultural mix that 
occurred between traders or Sufis with the native population. This is what 
becomes a cultural acculturation. 
In historical studies regarding the entry of Islam into Indonesia, several 
theories emerge, namely: 
a. The Gujarati theory 
The pioneer of this theory is Pojnappel. According to Pojnappel , 
Islam was brought by Arab Muslims who belong to the Syafi'i school of 
thought. Before spreading Islam to Indonesia, they first settled in India 
and then left or migrated to Indonesia. Furthermore, this theory was 
followed and developed by Snouck Horgronj e. According to Snouck 
Horgronje, the first to spread Islam to the archipelago were Gujarat 
scholars from India. After the scholars from Gujarat then the Arabs came 
and spread Islam in Indonesia. Snouck Horgronje did not mention 
explicitly the place where Islam was first spread in Indonesia. However 
he said that the 12th century was the most likely time for Islam to come 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  110 
 
to Indonesia. There are several reasons for Snouck Hurgronje in 
expressing this theory, namely: 
1) The facts that the Arabs who spread Islam are considered lacking. 
2) Relations between Indonesia and India in terms of trade have existed 
for a long time. 
3) There is an oldest inscription related to Islam found in Sumatra and 
shows that there is a relationship between Sumatra and Gujarat.  
(Arnold 1982). 
 
Then Snouck Hurgronje  strengthened his theory by saying that when 
Islam began to be strong in several port areas of the Indian Subcontinent, 
Msulim Deccan lived in the area and became intermediary traders on trade 
routes from the Middle East to the Archipelago. These traders c ame to 
Indonesia and became the first propagator of Islam in the archipelago at that 
time. (Suryanegara 1998). 
Among Dutch scholars, the theory became the theory supported by 
them. This theory is further strengthened by various arguments and evidence 
put forward by Dutch scholars, one of which is J.P. Moquette wrote this in his 
book entitled "D.e Graafsteen te Pase en Grise Vergelekenment Dergelijke 
momenten uit Hindoestan" and "De Eerste Vosten van Samudra Pasai". In these 
books Moquette strengthens Snouck's opinion  by taking evidence from the 
Tombstone of Sultan Malik As -Saleh who is the king of the Samudera Pasai 
Kingdom. 
Furthermore, a tombstone similar to the tombstone was found in the 
mausoleum of Maulana Malik Ibrahim (1419 AD) in East Java, precisely in the 
Gresik area. The tombstone is the same shape as the tombstone of Umar Ibn Al -
Kazruni in Gujarat. 
With the existence of several of these tombstones, it can be concluded 
that the import of tombstones from Gujarat to the Archipelago indicated that 
there was a t rading relationship that existed between Gujarat and Nusantara 
traders. This evidence further strengthens the Gujarat theory which is 
supported by Moquette by saying that Islam entered Indonesia brought from 
Gujarat and not directly from Arabic. 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  111 
 
This theory is very well known in the study of the history of the arrival 
of Islam in Indonesia. But even so there is resistance among experts about this 
theory. From the perspective of approach and methodology, the concept of 
social science in the sources referred to by Snouck Hurgronje raises doubts. In 
addition, Snouck ignores other historical evidence such as saga and tambo 
which according to him are nothing more than naive "stories", even though 
saga and tambo may contain history. 
One of the experts who revealed  the weakness of this theory was 
Tjandrasasmita who stated the following: 
1) This theory does not take into account shipping routes that were 
already in use before the 13th century AD, such as along the Malacca 
Strait and the West Coast of Sumatra. 
2) The tombst one of Fatimah Binti Maimun bin Hibatullah was found in 
Leran (Gresik) which was written in Kufic letters with the number 1082. 
This discovery shows that Islam has existed in Java since the 11th 
century AD. 
3) The opinion that there is a similarity between the tombstone of Sultan 
Malik as -Saleh and that of Umar ibn al -Kazaruni cannot be justified 
because the tombstones of the two are not the same. The type of stone 
used on Sultan Malik as -Saleh's tombstone was originally made by the 
Sultanate of Samudera Pasai. 
Furthermore, Buya Hamka said that the theory put forward by 
Snouck saying that Islam entered Indonesia from Gujarat was a political 
statement for colonial interests that had no academic basis. These colonial 
interests aim to deny Arabs as the first source of Islam among Malay 
children. The analysis of this theory is that  traders who come from Arabia in 
trading first stop in India. The trade route from Arabia to the archipelago, 
but first stopping in India, was a possible route for world trade at that time. 
The purpose of the stop in India is to prepare all the provisions needed to 
continue the journey to the next area. Stopper. 
b. Arabic theory 
This theory was put forward by Buya  Hamka. Based on this theory, Islam 
entered the archipelago directly by the Arabs, namely in the 7th century AD, 
when the Sriwijaya Kingdom was developing.  (Hasbullah 2012). This theory is 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  112 
 
supported by strong arguments. The argument is that the Malacca Strait in the 
7th-8th century AD was a trade route that was already crowded with traders 
from Southeast Asia and East Asia. Some Arab traders chose to settle or live in 
settlements on the coas t. Those who chose to stay married local residents and 
formed several Muslim communities in the area. (Anonymous 2011). 
Buya Hamka writes in his book entitled History of Indonesian Muslims, 
linking the theory of Arab and Chinese Islamization. According to Hamka, 
Islam entered Indo nesia in the 7th century AD. The spread was carried out by 
Arabs, not from people who came from India or Persia. Many historical records 
from China support this theory, one of which is a book entitled Chiu Thang 
Shu. In this book, it is explained that Arab s called Ta Shih once came to China 
for diplomatic purposes which were held in 651 AD (31 Hijri). Then four years 
later the Chinese dynasty held a meeting of delegates Tan Mi Mo Ni 'which is 
the designation for Amirul Mukminin. In the book it is also expla ined that the 
delegation was a messenger from the third Amirul Mukminin ul Mukminin, 
namely the caliph Uthman bin Affan. (Thohir 2009). 
The next character who strengthens this theory is J.C Van Leur who reveals 
that based on various travel information it is estimated that since t he 674 AD 
there were Arab groups on the northwestern side of the island of Sumatra, the 
area is Barus. Sourced from Chinese news, it can be seen that during the Tang 
Dynasty, namely in the 9 -10th century, the Ta Sih people were found in Canton 
and Sumatra.  The term Ta Sih is intended for Persians and Arabs who are 
known to have embraced Islam. (Yatim 2006). 
With various discoveries and the existence of connections between Middle 
Eastern and Eastern Muslims, far believed by various facts of the existence of 
Muslim settlements in China, it can be concluded that it is natural to assume 
that Muslim traders who ca me from the Middle East knew very well about the 
Archipelago. For example, the voyage carried out by I Tsing proved the 
existence of Arab settlements on the west coast of Sumatra. Furthermore, there 
is also evidence that there were writings written by Arab s who said that Arab 
traders were very familiar with the shipping routes of the Archipelago. Several 
Arab writers who wrote about this were Sulaiman (850 AD), Abu Zaid and Ibn 
Rusta (900 AD). Apart from writing that Arab traders were very familiar with 
Indonesian shipping, the writing also stated that the Arabs knew about the tin 
mines controlled by Zabaj. Zabaj according to Sir Thomas W. Arnold is 
Sriwijaya. (Yatim 1998) 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  113 
 
Crawfurd who is an expert also believes in this theory. However, on the one 
hand, he said that the relationship between the people of the Archipelago at 
that time and Muslim traders from India were taken into consideration and 
were a factor in determining the spread of Islam in the Archipelago. Another 
figure, namely Keizjer, said that Islam entered the archipelago because it was 
brought by people from Egypt with the consideration of the similarity of 
schools of thought between the archipelago and Egypt. Furthermore, the Arab 
theory is also supported by Nieman and De Hollander. They argue that Islam in 
Indonesia originates from the Hadramaut.  Several historical figures in 
Indonesia also believe in this theory. In 1969 and 1978 there was a seminar that 
discussed the history of Islam in Indonesia. The Seminar stated that Islam in 
Indonesia was brought directly by Arabs, not from Indian traders. Then Islam 
entered precisely in the 7th century AD, not the 13th century AD. 
The 1978 seminar held in Banda Aceh emphasized that the first Islamic 
kingdoms in the archipelago were Perlak, Pasai and Lamuri. It is believed that 
Islam entered Indonesia not in  the 13th century but in the 7 -8th century AD 
which is a rebuttal to the theory pioneered by orientalists in discussing Islam in 
Indonesia. (Daulay 2012). 
c. The Persian theory 
This theory explains that Islam entered Indonesia from Persia, namely in 
the 11th century AD. This theory emerged with consideration of the language 
used by the people of the archipelago. The language consideration in question 
is that the Arabic language used by the people of the Archipelago is influenced 
by Persian. One of the examples expressed by Nurcholis Madjid is Arabic 
words that have the ending ta' marbuthah in a waqf state are read using the 
letter “h”, for example the word prayer -un which is then read shalah , zakat 
which is then read zakah and so on . This shows that the Arabic language used 
in the archipelago does not originate directly from Arabic but from Persian and 
various Mainland Asian Islamic languages which include Urdu, Turkish, 
Pushto and various other languages. (Al-Qurthuby 1993). 
This theory basically focuses on the socio -cultural review that exists in 
Indonesian Islamic society which has similarities with Persian. This theory is 
strengthened by the discovery of groups of Persians in Aceh since the 15th 
century. Then there are various other similarities, namely: 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  114 
 
1) There is a celebration of the day of Ashura which is a Persian tradition. 
The celebration is known as the Ark Celebration in several regions in 
Indonesia such as Bengkulu and West Sumatra. 
2) The teachings of sheikh Siti Jenar which developed in several places have 
similarities with the teachings of Sufi al-Hallaj from Persia and Iran. Both 
the teachings of Syekh Siti Jenar and Sufi al -Halla were rejected by the 
authorities because they were considered contrary to the values of 
Islamic monotheism and endangered political stability. 
3) The title "Shah" used by several kings in Indonesia is also used in Persia. 
Umar Amin Husein as a supporter of this theory states: 
1) The Pegon letters known in Java are letters that come from Persia. 
2) The spelling used to spell Arabic letters in vowel punctuation, such as 
"Jabar, Jer" which is a term from the Iranian language which in Arabic is 
called "fathah and kasrah". 
3) The Muharram tr adition is associated with the son of Ali bin Abi Talib 
namely Husain who died in the Karbala area. This traditional ceremonial 
procession is carried out by parading the Ark, which is a chest. 
(Religious Literature Research and Development Center, 2005). 
Like other theories, this theory also received rejection from several 
figures such as Dahlan Mansur, Hamka, Saifuddi Zuhri. The rejection was 
because according to them Islam entered Indonesia clearly in the 7th century 
AD brought by Arabs who at that time w as under the rule of the Umayyad 
Caliph, while in Persia and Iran Islamic rule had not dominated the 
leadership. 
d. Turkish theory 
In addition to the several theories above, there is another theory expressed 
by Martin Van Bruinessen, namely the Turkish theory. This theory explains that 
apart from Arabs and Chinese, Islam in Indonesia was also pioneered by Kurds 
and Turks. The facts re vealed by Bruinessen are: first, the role of Kurdish 
scholars in spreading Islam with their books which are sources of Islamic 
studies. Second, the Syattariyah congregation taught by Nusantara scholars is 
the teaching of Ibrahim al -Kurani. Third, there is al-Barjanzi which is a popular 
tradition in Indonesia and is recited at the Prophet's birthday every 12th of 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  115 
 
Rabiul Awal. Fourth, in Indonesia they are familiar with Kurdish terms such as 
Kurdish Way, Kurdish Hajj. With these facts it can be seen that the Kurds also 
have a role in spreading Islam in Indonesia. 
e. Chinese theory 
Based on this theory, the entry of Islam into Indonesia is inseparable 
from the role of Muslim traders who came from China through trading 
voyages in the 7th -8th century AD. The place where Islam first entered 
based on this theory was Sumatra. Actually, this theory does not emphasize 
who, where and when Islam entered Indonesia, this theory only explains 
the role of Muslims who came from China in providing information about 
the exi stence of small Muslim groups in Indonesia and their role in 
developments in the 19th century. to 15/16 AD. 
The existence of Islam in China was earlier and more developed at 
that time when compared to Islam in the Archipelago. This can be seen 
from some historical evidence that Guangzhou already had a Wha -Zhin-Zi 
mosque in the 7th century, while at the same time in the archipelago only 
recently discovered the tombs of local people or trade envoys.  (Hasbullah 
2012). However, this theory is considered weak because in Barus there is no 
evidence to suggest that Chinese society was during the Old Lobu period, 
even though there are many Chinese ceramics. With regard to the Chinese 
ceramics found in Barus Guillot, field observations were carried out and 
studied written sources on this matter. Fr om the research he conducted it 
was found that ceramics 
CONCLUSION  
Islam entered Indonesia when there was already a Hindu -Buddhist 
culture originating from India. Even though the distribution is not evenly 
distributed, this culture has been embedded in several layers of Indonesian 
society. The process of the entry of Islam into Indonesia experienced a very long 
and gradual journey then developed and had diversity. Experts are still 
discussing the process of entry and development of Islam in I ndonesia. If 
studied historically or sociologically there are many problems that exist in the 
entry and development of Islam in Indonesia. There are three fundamental 
issues that are discussed by experts, namely: when Islam entered Indonesia, 
where and also who brought Islam to Indonesia. 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  116 
 
Islam was brought and spread throughout the archipelago, inseparable 
from the role of traders, preachers and Sufis. Although considered to play an 
important role in the spread of Islam, there are no historical records spec ifically 
made to explain the role of traders in the spread of Islam. The vast territory of 
Indonesia with various different conditions becomes a natural thing if there are 
different arguments among experts about the study of the entry of Islam in 
Indonesia. 
To study the development of Islam in Indonesia, one should know 
various events in sequence starting from the beginning of the arrival of Islam, 
the acculturation of cultures, the formation of communities to form empires and 
various other developments seq uentially. With this it will make it easier to 
understand how the long history of the process of entry and development of 
Islam in Indonesia. 
Hasan revealed that it is very easy to believe that Islam that entered 
Indonesia came from Arabic, which, if speci fied again, came from the Hijaz. It 
can be seen that the Hijaz is an area that has an important history in Islam, 
namely as the birthplace of the Prophet Muhammad, the growth and 
development of him and the place where revelations were sent down and 
starting to carry out his duties as an Apostle. Then Hasan also expressed his 
opinion on Persian and Indian theories, he said that he did not eliminate the 
role of people from these two regions in spreading Islam in Indonesia. Hasan 
argues that the geographical c onditions between Indonesia which are far from 
Arabs are associated with the history of Islam entering Indonesia, it is very 
possible that it involves a space that becomes an intermediary between 
Indonesia and Arabs. 
Basically, every theory described above  has advantages and 
disadvantages in its study. Please note that there is no theory that has absolute 
truth and standards. As expressed by Ayumardi Azra, the arrival of Islam to 
Indonesia is complex, that is, it comes from different places, is not spread b y 
one group, and at different times. 
 
REFERENCES 
Al-Qurthuby, Sumanto. 1993. Arus Cina-Islam Jawa Bongkar Sejarah Atas Peranan 
Tionghoa Dalam Penyebaran Agama Islam Di Nusantara Abad XV & XVI. 
Jakarta: Inspeal Press. 
1TH International Seminar and Conference on Islamic Studies (ISCIS) 2022 
Aswan: THE DEVELOPMENT OF ISLAM IN INDONESIA  117 
 
Anonymous. 2011. Khilafah Dan Jejak Islam, Kesultanan Islam Nusantara. Pustaka 
Thariqul Izzah: Bogor. 
Arnold, Thomas W. 1982. The Preacing of Islam, Edisi Indonesia Sejarah Dakwah 
Islam. Edited by A. Nawawi Rambe. Jakarta: Widjaja. 
Azra, Azyumardi. 1999. Renaisans Islam Asia Tenggara, Sejarah Wacana Dan 
Kekuasaan. Bandung: Remaja Rosdakarya. 
———. 2004. Jaringan Ulama Timur Tengah Dan Kepulauan Nusantara Abad XVII 
& XVIII. Jakarta: Kencana. 
Daulay, Haidar Putra. 2012. Sejarah Pertumbuhn Dan Pembaruan Pendidikan Islam 
Di Indonesia, Sejarah Pertumbuhan Dan Pembaruan Pendidikan Islam Di 
Indonesia. 3rd ed. Jakarta: Kencana Prenada Medua Group. 
Hasbullah. 1996. Sejarah Pendidikan Islam Di Indonesia Lintasan Sejarah 
Pertumbuhan Dan Perkembangan. Jakarta: Raja Grafindo Persada. 
Hasbullah, Moeflich. 2012. Sejarah Sosial Intelektual Islam Di Indonesia. Bandung: 
Pustaka Setia. 
Prastowo, Andi. 2016. Metode Penelitian Kualitatif Dalam Perspektif Rancangan 
Penelitian. Yogyakarta: Ar-Ruzz Media. 
Ricklefs, M.C. 1994. Sejarah Indonesia Modern, Terj. Dharmono Hardjowjono. 
Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press. 
Sukardi. 2003. Metodologi Penelitian Pendidikan: Kompetensi Dan Praktiknya. 
Jakarta: Bumi Aksara. 
Suryanegara, Ahmad Mansur. 1998. Menemukan Sejarah: Wacana Pergerakan 
Islam Di Indonesia. Bandung: Mizan. 
Thohir, Ajid. 2009. Studi Kawasan Dunia Islam Perspektif Etno-Linguistik Dan Geo-
Politik. Jakarta: Rajawali Pers. 
Yatim, Badri. 1998. Sejarah Islam Di Indonesia. 1st ed. Jakarta: Departemen 
Agama. 
———. 2006. Sejarah Peradaban Islam. Jakarta: Rajawali Pers. 
 