World History Connected Vol. 19, no. 2 June/July 2022
© 2022 by World History Connected
GHULAM A. NADRI
Islam, Muslim Merchants,  
and Commerce in Early Modern  
South Asia: Economic Encounters  
among Diverse Communities
T
his study seeks to reorient our approach to teaching early modern South Asia and 
Mughal India in particular. Before doing so, a discussion of the general pedagogical 
paradigm often employed in the classroom and an overview of the geographical setting is 
in order. Since the publication of J. S. Mill’s History of British India in the early nineteenth 
century, Indian history from around 1200 CE to 1750 CE is generally understood as the 
Muslim or Islamic period.1 The successive Arab, Turkish, Afghan, and Mughal conquests 
of parts of the Indian subcontinent (during the eighth to sixteenth centuries) are inter -
preted as Islamic conquests leading to the establishment of Muslim or Islamic rule. Islam 
as a religion, consequently, became central to any understanding of Indian history of this 
period, so much so that in many standard world-history textbooks published in the U.S., 
the Mughal Empire is treated as an Islamic empire. Religion-based periodization of Indian 
history has come under scrutiny only recently. Most notably, Richard Eaton has questioned 
the tendency among scholars to conflate empires with the personal faith of their rulers 
and offers an alternative approach to Indian history. 2 The treatment of Islam (and other 
religions as well) as monolithic or homogenous and antithetical to modern economic or 
capitalist rationality by many colonial and postcolonial authors is also problematic. It not 
only glosses over the immense diversity of beliefs and practices within the subcontinent, 
but it also has led many to regard certain religious values as obstacles to economic growth. 
It is important, therefore, to consider the many forms of Islam and the great diversity of 
Muslim communities in any discussion of Islamic faith in the region. A number of primary 
sources related to this article for student discussion have been provided in an Appendix.
 Studies of Muslim presence in South Asia have mainly focused on Islam’s interaction 
with local religions and cultures and have generated contradictory interpretations. Some 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
2
scholars have emphasized syncretism and argued that Islam was much indigenized as the 
Muslim communities retained many local non- Islamic practices and beliefs.3 Others have 
underscored the distinctiveness of Islam and the tendency among some Muslims to turn 
to “original” or “pure” Islam. 4 In these discussions, scholars have focused more on the 
socio- cultural aspirations and activisms of Muslim religious and political elites than on 
the lived experiences of ordinary believers. This essay turns to the professional world of 
Muslim merchants, an arena in which the dialectics of Islamic and non- Islamic commercial 
institutions and practices played out, and explores the formal and informal or customary 
commercial institutions that facilitated their enterprise. It examines how conscientious 
they were about Islamic laws (the so- called sharia) and to what extent their commercial 
activities were in conformity with it and the liberalities extended by the schools of Islamic 
jurisprudence. The analysis of their commercial activities is also important to counter the 
Eurocentric view that the Muslim inheritance laws, caste system, and other social practices 
restricted the scale and scope of commercial enterprise and inhibited economic growth.5 The 
inheritance laws, which have traditionally caused fragmentation of property, are held to 
have weakened the development of supra- personal economic institutions in Middle Eastern 
Islamic societies.6 By shifting our focus from identifying institutions as defined and dis -
cussed in Islamic prescriptive texts to exploring the merchant’s world and the complexities 
of their commercial undertakings we can better understand the extent of their adherence to 
Image 1: The Port City of Surat, 1690. Surat was the most prosperous port in the Mughal empire, 
graced by the mansions and the bustling warehouses of local merchant princes, Hindu and 
Muslim, doing business with a number of international traders, including Armenians and the 
French, English and Dutch East India Companies. As seen in this image, the European mer -
chants flew flags from their “factories” or commercial establishments to identify their location 
to ships entering the port. Jacob Peeters, 1690. In the Public Domain under licensing provisions 
at Wikimedia Commons.
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
3
and deviation from business- related provisions of sharia as well as the interplay of Islamic 
institutions and the economic performance of South Asian merchant communities.
 In South Asia, several port cities on the western and eastern coasts and urban centers 
in the interior had a large concentration of Muslims involved in maritime commerce. In 
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, Cambay in Gujarat and Calicut on the Malabar Coast 
were the premier ports of the subcontinent’s oceanic trade. As Tomé Pires wrote, “Cambay 
stretches out two arms, with her right arm she reaches out towards Aden and with the other 
towards Malacca, as the most important places to sail to.”7 At both of these places, Muslim 
merchants had come to dominate the maritime trade by the fourteenth century. 8 On the 
Coromandel Coast and in Bengal, the immigrant and local Muslim merchants acquired 
prominence in overseas trade.9 Thus, around 1500, when the Portuguese arrived in Indian 
waters, Muslim merchants were in full control of shipping and maritime trade in the Ara-
bian Sea and the Bay of Bengal.
 By the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Surat in Gujarat and Cochin on the 
Malabar Coast assumed greater significance owing to the increasingly important role they 
came to play in Indian Ocean commerce under the aegis of the Mughal Empire and the 
Kingdom of Travancore respectively.10 Surat eventually emerged as the largest port of the 
Mughal Empire and was the headquarters of the English East India Company and Dutch 
East India Company (Verenigde Oost- indische Compagnie) in north- western India for 
much of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. On the Coromandel Coast, commercial 
fortune moved from one city to another depending on how favorable a particular port was 
for the local and European merchants. Madras, Masulipatnam, Porto Novo, Pulicat, and 
Nagapatnam were prominent ones and became the abode of numerous merchants of dif-
ferent ethnic and cultural backgrounds.11 In Bengal, cities such as Hugli, Murshidabad, and 
Dhaka, were chief commercial centers, each with a sizeable presence of local merchants and 
European companies and private traders. Since the early seventeenth century, the fortunes 
of many of these cities were closely linked with European trade. 12 The Muslim merchant 
communities remained nevertheless an important factor in the port- to- port trade of the 
Indian Ocean.
Islam in South Asia
It is essential that students of South Asia understand that the followers of Islam were not a 
monolithic social or religious phenomenon and that a variety of Islamic religious traditions 
arrived in South Asia in different ways, via different actors, and at different times. Many 
North American students are familiar with the concept of a differentiated Islam: they know 
of Sunni and Shi’a. However, extending their knowledge beyond this simple divide can 
be easily demonstrated by examining the complexities of commercial interactions among 
diverse merchant communities in South Asia and the flexible, financial institutions created 
to facilitate exchange in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
4
 The rise of Islam in Arabia and its rapid expansion eastward in the seventh and eighth 
centuries intensified commercial interaction along the western Indian Ocean littoral. Ara-
bian navigational expertise and maritime enterprise blossomed in the subsequent centuries 
as Arab ships plied the waters between the Red Sea and the South China Sea providing a 
great deal of unity to the Indian Ocean world.13 This commercial dominance was so much 
so that Arab merchants came to control much of the maritime trade of the western Indian 
Ocean at the turn of the second millennium CE.14 By the early twelfth century, in the words 
of Andre Wink, “the Muslims dominated all important maritime and caravan trade routes 
with the exception only of the northern trans- Eurasian silk route from China to India and 
Russia, and one major trade centre, Byzantium.”15 The newly converted Muslim Arab and 
Persian merchants trading with South Asia introduced Islam to that region in the eighth 
and ninth centuries. Many such merchants had established themselves permanently or 
quasi- permanently in several major coastal regions such as Gujarat, the Malabar and Cor-
omandel Coasts, Ceylon, and Bengal.16 The immigrant merchants needed a social base to 
support their businesses; hence integration with local society was a crucial step toward 
turning circumstances to their favor. Many visiting merchants married local women and 
gradually formed a local Islamic society on the coasts of South Asia. The Mappila Muslims 
of Malabar and the Labbais and Marakkayars of Coromandel are communities that came 
into being out of such integration in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.17
 South Asia also witnessed, from the northwest, a series of military expeditions much 
more likely to appear in history texts than the merchant activity just described. This military 
action was primarily motivated toward establishing political control over the territory.18 The 
Ghorid invasions of the late twelfth century led to the establishment of the Delhi Sultanate, 
which was ruled by successive Turk and Afghan Muslim dynasties. Because of these con-
quests, a new Muslim aristocracy substituted the formerly Rajput governing classes in the 
newly conquered territories. Additionally, a Muslim socio- cultural base began to be built 
mainly through articulating power in such a way that a number of Muslims, settled in clus-
ters in those regions, was culturally assimilated and many more people were encouraged 
to come into the folds of the new faith.19 The Islamic cultural ethos was strengthened even 
further under the auspices of the independent sultanates in Bengal, Gujarat (1347–1573), the 
Bahmani Kingdom of the Deccan (1347–early fifteenth century), and subsequently under 
the Mughal political regime (1526–1757).
 A third strand in the formation of the Muslim community in South Asia was repre -
sented by the Sufis, who came from West Asia equipped with the Islamic philosophy of 
mysticism. Being mostly Sunnis and followers of the Hanafi, the most liberal of the four 
schools of Islamic jurisprudence, the Sufi saints introduced a less orthodox form of Islam in 
the subcontinent.20 The Sufis usually lived among ordinary people, spoke their language, 
borrowed and adopted many of their cultural practices, and, above all, welcomed everyone 
into their hospices (khanqahs) and had respect for people of other faiths. It was through the 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
5
efforts of the Sufi saints that Muslim societies developed in the Punjab and the Deccan. 21 
While some Sufis believed that true love for God was the essence of every religion and 
thus it did not matter to them how one worshiped, some considered conversion of their 
non- Muslim followers to Islam to be a noble objective.22
 The Muslim community that emerged in South Asia thus comprised people of dif -
ferent cultural persuasions representing three strands of orthodox, liberal political, and 
pluralistic Islam. The Arab settlers of coastal South Asia represented the most orthodox 
form of Islam and were mainly followers of the Shafi’i school of Sunni jurisprudence. 
They adhered rather strictly to their supposedly superior culture and tradition and did 
not let local cultural influences permeate their so- called purist Islam. As Susan Bayly has 
remarked, the Marakkayar Muslims settled along the Coromandel Coast were Shafi’is who 
claimed to be “pure descendants of the 9th and 10th century Arab traders and seafarers” 
and consequently “stigmatize[d] other Tamil- speaking Muslims as ‘mere converts’, per-
sons of humble origin who converted from Hinduism in the relatively recent past.”23 The 
political conquest of Bengal, Gujarat, and the Deccan by the Sultans of Delhi resulted in 
the expansion of the Muslim ruling classes. The majority of Muslims who came to these 
regions in the course of the Turkish invasions were followers of the Hanafi School. Local 
converts found it convenient to adhere to this school, which allowed them to retain some 
practices and beliefs of their former religion. The Muslim cultures that emerged in South 
Asia differed in matters of rituals and customs, and differed quite substantially from the 
Islam of Arabia.24
 In many South Asian ports, Muslims formed the second major group after the Hindu 
and Jain merchants (the Banias in western India and the Chettis and Komatis in Coro -
mandel).25 The Muslim merchant community was heterogeneous, incorporating several 
sub- communities based on different ethnic, linguistic, or regional affiliations.26 A majority 
of Muslim merchants adhered to Sunni Islam while others were Shias. The West Asian 
Arabs, the Turks, the Mughals, and a section of Gujarati Bohra merchants followed the 
Sunni tradition. The Khojas, the Persians, and a section of the Bohras followed the Shia 
tradition. Among the Sunnis, a majority followed the Hanafi School of jurisprudence and 
others followed the Shafi’i or another school.
 This heterogeneity was also expressed quite explicitly in their social and commercial 
cultures. The expansion of political Islam in South Asia allowed its new converts to retain 
some of their customary practices and beliefs. This is evident in the regional differences in 
social customs and cultural practices throughout the subcontinent. 27 Excepting the basic 
tenets of Islam (faraiz or mandatory beliefs and rituals), local pre- Islamic cultural practices 
and values remained prominent and, in some cases, even dominant in everyday life.28
 Islam emerged in a society that thrived on commerce. Right from the beginning, 
the pre- Islamic practices were adapted as legitimate methods of conducting trade except 
the prohibition of usury (riba).29 The pre- Islamic institutions of commenda (a commercial 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
6
contract between an investing merchant and a traveling merchants) and partnership were 
incorporated into sharia and recognized as legal instruments of pooling resources, such as 
cash, goods, skills, or a combination of all, to carry out commercial activities.30 There is no 
consensus among the four schools of Sunni jurisprudence regarding the nature and mode 
of application of these institutions. Of all, the Hanafi School and the liberality with which it 
legitimated the commenda arrangements (not valid in Shafi’i jurisprudence) broadened the 
scope of this institution to accommodate different types and forms of commercial dealings. 
With the application of juristic preference ( istihsān) or legal devices ( hiyāl), instruments 
to circumvent any prohibition, many forms of commercial dealings were considered per-
missible under the Hanafi law of commenda and partnership. Abraham L. Udovitch has 
attributed the affluence of the Muslim world in the early Middle Ages to the superiority 
and flexibility of the commercial techniques available to merchants.31
 In South Asia, the Mughal Empire and Muslim sultanates in the Deccan, embraced 
heterogeneity and diversity and provided a broad institutional framework for merchants 
to carry out trade and other economic activities. It is important for students to know that 
as sovereigns, Muslim rulers did not really follow Islamic laws. Many of their actions and 
policies, in fact, were adaptations of local non- Islamic rituals and practices. States unbound 
by sharia, thus, gave Muslim merchants a wider space to pursue their calling. Their fiscal 
and commercial measures and policies greatly facilitated trade and benefited merchants. 
What follows below is an exploration of the state as an institution and the extent to which 
its policies and practices conformed to or deviated from sharia.
The state as an institution
The seventeenth century was a period of unprecedented growth in South Asian commodity 
production and trade. The Mughal Empire’s fiscal and trade policies stimulated the economy 
and contributed to economic growth. The territorial integration of northern and western 
India connected the productive interior with the ports of Gujarat and Bengal and brought the 
region into the orbit of Euro- Asian trade, both oceanic and caravan. The relative peace and 
internal security within the empire and the standardized currency system further encour-
aged extensive trading. The systematization of revenue collection in cash induced peasants 
to cultivate high- value crops and stimulated them to use money as a means of exchange. 
Whereas the state benefitted the most as large revenues annually flowed to its exchequer, 
the fortunes of the merchants and manufacturers also grew rapidly. 32 The Mughal state 
regulated the commercial taxation and imposed a uniform duty on imports and exports. 
The state disregarded the sharia stipulation of a lower rate for Muslims and a higher rate 
for non- Muslims.33 It was not until 1663 when Emperor Aurangzeb (1657–1707) imposed 
differential customs duties whereby all Muslim merchants were asked to pay 2.5 percent 
of the value of merchandise while the others paid the usual 5 percent, the rates prescribed 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
7
by sharia.34 Two years later even this reduced duty was abolished altogether for all Muslim 
merchants.35 However, due to the loss of revenue, the emperor reinstated the 2.5 percent 
customs duties for Muslim merchants. 36 Whatever the legality of these regulations from 
the point of view of the sharia, one can hardly deny their implications for maritime trade. 
The reduction and then the abolition of the custom duties on all imports and exports must 
have given to Muslim merchants a certain advantage over others in the sale and purchase 
of merchandise.37 The assessment and collection of customs duties were arbitrary.38 In the 
eighteenth century, European merchants paid lower custom duties than Muslims at many 
ports of the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea.39 In levying commercial taxes, the Mughal and 
other empires of West Asia were governed by their fiscal and political expediencies rather 
than by sharia.
 Like the Mughals, the sultanates of Gujarat and Golconda took interest in maritime 
matters and played crucial roles in attracting merchants and merchandise to the ports they 
controlled. Sinnappah Arasaratnam has emphasized the role of Golconda and Bijapur rulers 
in the growth of commercial fortunes of their respective ports of Masulipatnam and Naga-
patnam located on the Coromandel Coast.40 The commercial success of the Chulia Muslim 
merchants in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was largely due to the supportive 
institutional framework put in place by the rulers of various Muslim states in the Malay- 
Indonesian archipelago such as Perak, Kedah, Aceh, and Bantam.41 The Mughal Empire and 
other states, thus, played a vital role in the growth and expansion of trade and commerce 
and the overall economy in South Asia. States’ fiscal and trade policies certainly created 
favorable conditions for merchants. But what enabled merchants to carry out their enter -
prise was a stable set of mechanisms and modes of pooling capital, expertise, and other 
resources and sharing the risk. The rest of this essay focuses on commercial institutions 
and practices, such as partnership, commercial intermediation, and banking, that fostered 
mercantile success.42
Commenda and Partnership
Commenda (mudāraba) and actual partnerships, limited (inān) and unlimited or universal 
(mufāwada), were the most common forms of pooling resources in long- distance trade. A per-
son with cash or merchandise could make a commenda agreement with an agent- manager 
who was to trade with it and return the capital together with the previously agreed- upon 
share of profit to the former.43 The remainder would be the share of the agent- manager as a 
reward for his labor. The agent had no liability for the losses resulting from the exigencies 
of sea travel or from an unsuccessful business venture.44 Often, merchants had recourse to 
actual partnership by jointly investing capital and sharing the profit. Mulla Fakhruddin, a 
Muslim merchant of Surat, traded in partnership with an English merchant in Bombay in 
the 1730s and 1740s.45 In Coromandel, a Muslim merchant, Mohammad Shafi, owned a ship 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
8
jointly with D’Aqueres and Shaikh Sultan, another Muslim merchant, traded in partnership 
with Kupa Chetty, a Tamil Hindu merchant.46 In Surat, a Parsi merchant, Mancherji Khur-
shedji, traded in partnership with his co- broker and Bania merchants, Rudraram Raidas 
and his son Govindram Rudraram, during 1750–80.47 In a social milieu where familial val-
ues were highly respected and considered the basic unit of all commercial ventures, the 
joint family itself traded as a unit. Mulla Fakhruddin’s sons, Mulla Waliuddin and Mulla 
Abdul Fateh carried on the family business under joint ownership. 48 There are examples 
of commercial partnership where family members jointly invested their resources, shared 
liabilities, and carried on trade together. The timber merchants of Broach in Gujarat, Karim 
Khan, his brother Ismail Khan, and the latter’s son Nusrat Khan jointly negotiated loans.49 
This brief sketch reveals that although trade partnerships were commonly formed within 
the family or community, Muslim merchants had no difficulty trading in partnership with 
merchants of other communities. Likewise, they had no difficulty in utilizing the services 
of Bania or Parsi bankers and brokers.
Commercial intermediation: wakil (agent) and dalal (broker)
A large part of South Asia’s exports was handled by its own merchants. Major ports such 
as Surat, Masulipatnam, Porto Novo, and Hugli were commercial hubs with significant 
concentrations of merchants, agents, brokers, bankers, and suppliers. Although people 
of all ethnicities and faiths participated in commercial activities, traditionally, Muslim 
merchants engaged in oceanic trade. The logistical and geographical dimensions of early 
modern Indian Ocean trade rendered any enterprise impossible without the active coop -
eration of a group of spatially dispersed people with navigational and book- keeping skills. 
Any successful commercial undertaking depended on networks of trustworthy merchants 
performing a variety of agency services.
 Islam permits Muslim merchants to use the services of brokers and agents.50 The afflu-
ent Muslim merchants and shipowners involved in multi- dimensional trading ventures, 
managed their trade through an agent ( wakil or gumashta) or a broker (dalal). Apparently, 
the distinction between a broker and an agent was functional. In practice, however, each 
took such diverse forms that no designation captures all modes of business dealings. The 
exact nature of employment of agents and forms of remuneration are not clearly stated in 
our sources. Possibly, they were rewarded for their services by certain commercial priv -
ileges or allowance or a share in the profit. Generally, the stewards on ships were agents 
transacting business on behalf of the shipowners. They were merchants in their private 
capacity and for servicing the shipowners enjoyed certain privileges, which in many cases 
included a right to carry their own merchandise on board free of freight and other charges.51 
In a farman (imperial order) of Shahjahan (dated 25 Shawwal 1053 A.H. /9 January 1644), 
Shaikh Abdur Rahim and Shaikh Abdus Samad, the stewards of the imperial ship Ganjawar 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
9
were allowed to carry on board their goods to Jeddah free of charges. Mukarram Abdur 
Rasul, the agent and steward of Mancherji’s ships, had a similar privilege when he sailed 
to Malacca and Siam. At the latter places, he was to sell the merchandise belonging to the 
shipowner and procure a return cargo for his principal.52 As an agent, he apparently had 
no entitlement to any share in the profits and was instead allowed to carry merchandise 
on board on his own account free of charges. In 1763, he was authorized to carry goods 
worth 5,000 rupees on board Mancherji’s ship, the Emmudi, sailing to Siam.53
 Although, the merchants generally trusted members of their family, clan, or commu-
nity as agents, dependable networks were also built with persons outside the family and 
community. Mulla Abdul Ghafur, for instance, entrusted the task of bringing back the Faiz 
Rasan from Batavia with the additional responsibility of procuring from there a cargo of 
suitable merchandise to Yar Mohammad son of Sher Mohammad, probably a Bohra Mus-
lim.54 Tipu Sultan’s agent at Masqat was a Muslim, Mir Qasim. The Imam of Masqat had 
Ghaus Mohammad Khan, a Muslim, as his agent at Manglore while Imam Said’s agent 
at Cochin was Shaikh Ibrahim who later became Sultan bin Ahmad’s agent at Bombay. 55 
Abdullah ibn Yusuf, a Jewish merchant of Basra, had Ishaq Dawud, a Jew, as his agent in 
Surat while he himself acted as the broker of Tipu Sultan of Mysore.56 Most Muslim mer-
chants availed themselves of the services of the Bania and Parsi brokers and bankers. A 
Muslim merchant, Abdur Rahman Sulaimanji, had Girdhar Das son of Purshottam Das 
of Surat as his broker and Vishnu Das, a Bania merchant, was the broker of Haji Khalil at 
Masqat and served as the English East India Company’s broker during 1799–1803.57
 The relationship between agents and their principal merchants was based on trust 
and a conscientious performance of duty. Usually, the agents were careful not to lose their 
principal’s trust but because they were also merchants with their own commercial interests, 
trust was sometimes breached. A dispute occurred when Mokarram Abdur Rasul, the agent 
and nakhuda (steward) of the ship of a Parsi merchant, Mancherji Khurshedji, allegedly 
committed fraud in the sale and purchase of goods belonging to Mancherji at Malacca and 
delayed the departure of the ship from there to serve his own private trading interests.58
Financial intermediation: bankers (sarrafs and sahukars)
Muslim merchants generally refrained from providing financial/banking services primarily 
because sharia prohibits usury. While explaining the logic of its prohibition, scholars have 
emphasized the exploitative nature of usury and argued that the Islamic ban on interest 
is essentially to prevent exploitation of the poor. 59 Commercial lending is somewhat dif -
ferent from ordinary loans and sharia laws did not apply to every type of lending.60 There 
are nevertheless examples of Muslim moneylenders and moneychangers in South Asia., 
though these are exceptions to the norm.61 The money market in South Asia was dominated 
by the Gujarati Banias, Marwaris, and Parsis. In West Asia, too, the practitioners of usury 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
10
were mostly Jews, Parsis, and Banias.62 It is interesting to note that even though Muslims 
generally spurned usury, they were, nonetheless, the major recipients of interest- bearing 
loans throughout the Islamic world. Nowhere is this more evident than in shipping and 
overseas trading, activities in which Muslim merchants were primarily involved and where 
the stimulus for investment and pooling of resources was imminent.
Maritime banking: bottomry and respondentia
Bottomry and respondentia were the two forms of maritime investment and of pooling 
resources. In many ways, these were variants of commenda and partnership. Whereas in 
the latter, profits were usually shared by the investors and the managers, in respondentia 
and bottomry loans the lender received a fixed premium on the money invested. The lender 
had to bear risks and the borrower had no liability until the ship and the merchandise (both 
being surety for the loans) arrived safely at the intended port. Upon arrival, the creditor or 
his agent received the capital along with the premium regardless of the actual transactions. 
A high premium was the reward to the lender for bearing the risk.63 The beneficiary had the 
advantage of keeping for himself whatever was above the stipulated amount payable to 
the lender if the transactions were favorable. At times, however, the beneficiaries suffered 
losses and were unable to pay the stipulated sum. Such instances led to disputes which 
were usually resolved through the adjudication of three or more arbiters appointed by the 
concerned parties.64
 Because of the seasonal nature of Indian Ocean trade, Muslim merchants were often 
forced to borrow money on interest from Bania and Parsi moneylenders to carry out their 
trading enterprise. In the eighteenth century, merchants intending to sail or send their goods 
to West Asia willingly accepted respondentia loans offered by the English East India Com-
pany. The English used respondentia loans as a means of obtaining funds for their coffee 
investments in Mokha. The recipients of this loan, overwhelmingly Muslims, undertook 
to pay the money lent at Surat to the company at Mokha at the stipulated rate of exchange 
(54–56 German coins full weight for 100 Surat Rupees).65 This provided merchants with their 
initial capital and induced them to buy merchandise and ship them to their agents at the 
destined ports. The goods on board served as security for the loans, and the merchants had 
full assurance that their goods would be delivered safely to their agents or representatives.
 The Muslim shipowners also accepted bottomry loans from other merchants and 
invested the money in procuring goods for overseas trade. In 1796, Antoba Sunderji, a mer-
chant of Surat, lent a sum to Malik Ahmad (a Muslim merchant and probably the owner of 
the ship, Fath- i Khars) to run on respondentia and the latter, in a written bond, promised to 
pay 2,505 dollars to Sunderji.66 Thus, Muslim merchants like all others, were beneficiaries 
of the maritime loans. Shipowners and commodity traders generally accepted loans from 
prospective investors and paid interest. Those who lent money on interest or borrowed 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
11
and paid interest on it certainly took advantage of the ambiguity of sharia and followed 
local customary practices.
 Local pre- Islamic institutions and practices were wholly or partly integrated with sha-
ria, as evidenced by bottomry and respondentia loans, which originated independently of 
Islam and were widely practiced in the Indian Ocean. Similarly, variants of commenda and 
partnerships were common among Muslim merchants everywhere. They had commenda 
arrangements and partnerships with non- Muslim merchants despite the fact that a more 
conservative interpretation of Islam approves only close- community partnerships.67 The 
broad institutional framework and the degree of elasticity in incorporating diverse modes 
of commercial dealings contributed to Muslim merchants’ preeminence in Indian Ocean 
commerce in the two centuries preceding the beginning of the British colonial rule in South 
Asia in the 1750s.
Conclusions
The commercially complex world discussed above clearly underscores the syncretic nature 
of Islam in South Asia and the diversity of the Muslim merchant communities. It also offers 
an outline for a classroom strategy to help twenty- first century students learn about the 
nexus of society, economy, politics, and religion in South Asia and the larger Indian Ocean 
trade system. A discussion of the modes of operation and forms of commercial engagements 
utilized by the Muslim merchants of South Asia will reveal to students that those com -
mercial activities were largely carried out in accordance with the institutional framework 
sustained and supported by the state in conjunction with sharia. Throughout the period 
under review, Muslim merchants, quite like their European Christian counterparts, were 
able to circumvent the prohibitions imposed by their religion.68 Muslim merchants did not 
deliberately violate sharia but sometimes when commercial logic was in direct confrontation 
with Islamic law, they disregarded the latter.69 This was so because Islamic prohibition of 
certain commercial practices carries with it social and ethical rather than religious signifi-
cance.70 Nevertheless, all business transactions were to be conducted with fairness and in 
accordance with the terms of the contract. And, by and large, merchant’s behavior was in 
tune with the provisions of the contracts and with prevailing moral and ethical codes.71
 The nature of the Muslim presence in South Asia and the predominance of the Hanafi 
school of Islamic jurisprudence made it possible for rulers and merchants to juxtapose local 
customary practices with those sanctioned by Islam. In commerce, pragmatism preceded 
every other consideration in the same way that political expediency was the hallmark of 
state formation under the Delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire. Thus, Muslim merchants 
inhabited a highly complex world and benefited from commercial institutions some of which 
were pre- Islamic but had been integrated with sharia. The versatility and sophistication of 
the banking, agency, and brokering institutions in South Asia challenge the argument that 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
12
a strict adherence to religious, caste, and community values obstructed economic growth. 
Indeed, the existence of a reasonably stable set of South Asian commercial practices deemed 
acceptable despite their deviation from sharia strongly suggests otherwise.
Appendix
Abstracts of Primary Sources for Student Discussion
1. British Library (G/36/60) Factory Records Surat, no. 60, Letter to the Super Cargo of 
Glatton to Mocha, Mr. Thomas Porteus, Surat, 30 March 1784, p. 97.
 Surat merchants freighted goods to their agents in Mocha on the Glatton, an East 
India Company ship. In the letter to the super-cargo of the ship, the East India 
Company chief in Surat delivered “bills for 10,274:18 new German crowns full 
weight payable to you (the super-cargo) at Mocha.” This sum was for “Surat 
Rupees 18,346:2:75 lent here at respondentia at the rate of 56 new German crowns 
full weight per 100 rupees.” A list of all those merchants who had received the 
loans and the names of those from whom the super-cargo was to recover the 
amount in German crowns at Mocha is enclosed with the letter.
2. British Library (G/36/74), Factory Records Surat, no. 74, Consultations at Surat, 6 June 
1796, pages 592–94.
 Petition of Antoba Sunderji of Surat
 Antoba Sunderji, a merchant of Surat, lent his own money to Malik Ahmad, the 
owner of the ship, Fath-i Khars, to run at “respondentia” with a payment of 2,505 
Mocha dollars due to the petitioner after the ship’s safe arrival at the port of 
destination. Malik Ahmad also executed a bond with the same terms. However, 
when the ship reached the destination, Antoba Sunderji was unable to secure 
payment from Malik Ahmad. The arbiters decided in favor of Sunderji stating 
that the sum of 2,505 dollars was “justly and undoubtedly” due to him. Malik 
Ahmad did not pay and that caused a great loss to Antoba Sunderji. The latter 
petitioned the East India Company’s chief in Surat to intervene and persuade the 
Nawab of Surat to settle the matter in his favor.
3. British Library (G/36/75), Factory Records Surat, no. 75, Consultations at Surat, 24 
September 1796 and 12 October 1796, pages 857–58, 904–6.
 a. A petition of Mulla Waliuddin, son of Mulla Fakhruddin, regarding the con -
tinuation of the customs exemption to the value of rupees 200,000 ( maa’fi). [pp. 
857–8]
 In 1796, Mulla Waliuddin petitioned the East India Company chief in Surat 
requesting the company to help him secure half of the exemption, that is exemp-
tion from customs duties on goods worth rupees 100,000, leaving the other half 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
13
to his younger brother, Mulla Abdul Fateh. Mulla Waliuddin further declared 
that, after his father’s death, he and his younger brother have jointly carried out 
family business but have kept the exemption from customs separate for certain 
unspecified reasons. Through this petition, Waliuddin wished to have his share 
separated from that of his brother so that no further disputes arise between the 
two brothers.
 b. A petition of Mulla Abdul Fateh complaining against his brother, Waliuddin’s 
claim to a share in the exemption (maa’fi). [pp. 904–6]
 Mulla Abdul Fateh objected to his brother, Mulla Waliuddin’s efforts to separate 
his share in the customs exemption from his brother. In a petition to the East India 
Company chief in Surat, Abdul Fateh makes his case by raising the following 
points: (a) that his father entrusted him with everything, including taking care 
of the family and children, which he has done for over fifteen years; (b) that his 
brother, Mulla Waliuddin, is a troublesome person and has quarreled with his 
sisters and treated them with disrespect; (c) that Waliuddin is under the influence 
of some wicked people and is trying to destroy the credit and reputation of our 
family; (d) that he obtained favorable letters from Mr. Boddam and Mr. Ramsay 
(East India Company governors in Bombay) confirming his entitlement to carry 
on the family business before his brother got such a letter from the late Nawab of 
Surat; (e) that Waliuddin is not entitled to any share in the customs exemption. 
Abdul Fateh also records in the petition that while he cannot give up his rights 
to his brother, he will do everything in his power to continue supporting him as 
he has done and continues to do so for the entire family.
Ghulam A. Nadri is Professor of History and Director of the Asian Studies Center at Georgia 
State University, USA. He obtained his PhD. from Leiden University in 2007. In 2011–2012, 
he was a Newton International Fellow at the Economic History Department of the London 
School of Economics and Political Science, United Kingdom. He has published two mono-
graphs (The Political Economy of Indigo in India, 1580–1930: A Global Perspective (Leiden, NL: 
Brill, 2016), and Eighteenth-Century Gujarat: The Dynamics of Its Political Economy, 1750–1800 
(Leiden, NL: Brill, 2009) and several journal articles and book chapters on merchants, com-
modities, maritime labor, economy, and trade in Gujarat and the western Indian Ocean. His 
current research project explores the dynamics of the economic and commercial enterprise 
of the Parsis (Zoroastrians) in western India in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 
He teaches graduate and undergraduate courses on the history of India, the Indian Ocean 
world, Asia in the world economy, and world history. He can be reached at gnadri@gsu.edu.
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
14
NOTES
1  J. S. Mill, The History of British India, 6 vols. (London: Baldwin, Cradock and Joy, 1817); W. H. 
Moreland, The Agrarian System of Moslem India (Cambridge: W. Heffer & Sons, 1929).
2  Richard M. Eaton, India in the Persianate Age, 1000–1765  (Oakland, CA: University of Cali -
fornia Press, 2019).
3  Imtiaz Ahmad, Ritual and Religion among Muslims in India (New Delhi: Manohar, 1981); Asim 
Roy, The Islamic Syncretistic Tradition in Bengal, (Princeton. NJ: Princeton University Press, 1983); Asim 
Roy, Islam in South Asia (New Delhi: South Asian Publishers, 1996). Many scholars have challenged 
the notion of Islam as a monolithic entity, static, and intolerant of others: Richard M. Eaton, Essays 
on Islam and Indian History (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1987); Katherine P . Ewing, Shari‘at 
and Ambiguity in South Asian Islam (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988); Muzaffar Alam, 
The Languages of Political Islam in India, 1200–1800 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002).
4  Barbara D. Metcalf, Islamic Revival in India: Deoband, 1860–1920  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1982); Francis Robinson, Islam and Muslim History in South Asia (New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press, 2000), see especially, chapter 2.
5  Max Weber, The Protestant Ethics and the Spirit of Capitalism  (London: Routledge, 1992). For 
a critique of this view, see Morris D. Morris, “Values as an Obstacle to Economic Growth in South 
Asia: An Historical Survey,” Journal of Economic History  27, no. 4 (1967), 588–607. See also a brief 
discussion on some of the related issues in John Goheen et al., “India’s Cultural Values and Eco -
nomic Development: A Discussion,” Economic Development and Cultural Change 7, no. 1 (1958): 1–12.
6  Timur Kuran, “The Islamic Commercial Crisis: Institutional Roots of Economic Underdevel-
opment in the Middle East,” Journal of Economic History 63, 2 (2003): 414–46.
7  Tomé Pires, The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires, An Account of 
the East, from the Red Sea to Japan, written in Malacca and India in 1512–1515, and The Book of Francisco 
Rodrigues, Rutter of a Voyage in the Red Sea, Nautical Rules, Almanack and Maps, Written and Drawn in 
the East before 1515 Volume I, trans. Armando Cortesâo (London: The Hakluyt Society,1944), 42–5; 
André Wink, Al-Hind: the Making of the Indo-Islamic World, vol. 3 (Leiden: Brill, 2004), 196.
8  Wink, Al-Hind, 3: 197, 199–200, 203–5.
9  Wink, Al-Hind, 3: 209–12.
10  See Ashin Das Gupta, Indian Merchants and the Decline of Surat, 1750–1800 (Wiesbaden, DE: 
Franz Steiner Verlag Wiesbaden Gmbh, 1979); Ashin Das Gupta, Malabar in Asian Trade, 1740–1800 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967).
11  Arasaratnam has underscored the distinct character of the Coromandel Coast, especially the 
absence of a major trade emporium like that of Surat, Calicut, Cochin, or Hugli and the decentral -
ized nature of trade on the coast. See Sinnappah Arasaratnam, Merchants, Companies and Commerce 
on the Coromandel Coast, 1650–1740  (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1986), chapters 1 and 3; 
Sinnappah Arasaratnam, Maritime Trade, Society and European Influence in Southern India, 1600–1800 
(Aldershot. UK: Ashgate, 1995).
12  K. N. Chaudhuri, The Trading World of Asia and the English East India Company, 1660–1760  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984); Om Prakash, The Dutch East India Company and 
the Economy of Bengal, 1630–1720  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985); Om Prakash, 
European Commercial Enterprise in Pre-Colonial India (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
15
13  K. N. Chaudhuri, Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History from the Rise 
of Islam to 1757; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985); Michael Pearson, The Indian Ocean 
(New York: Routledge, 2003); Prakash, European Commercial Enterprise ; Patricia Risso, “Muslim 
Identity in the Maritime Persian Gulf/Indian Ocean Region,” International Journal of Middle Eastern 
Studies 21 (1989), 381–92; Wink, Al-Hind, 3: 184.
14  Satish C. Misra, Muslim Communities in Gujarat: Preliminary Studies in their History and Social 
Organisation (Baroda: Maharaja Sayajirao University, 1964), 3; Sinnappah Arasaratnam, Islamic Mer-
chant Communities of the Indian Subcontinent in Southeast Asia (Kuala Lumpur, MY: Sri Lanka Endow-
ment Fund Lecture, University of Malaya, 1989), 3.
15  André Wink, ‘‘Al-Hind’: India and Indonesia in the Islamic World-Economy, c. 700–1800 AD,” 
Peter J. Marshall, et al, eds., India and Indonesia during the Ancien Regime (Leiden, NL: Brill, 1989), 34.
16  For a brief survey of the early Muslim settlements along the coasts of India, see Wink, 
Al-Hind, 3: 195–213.
17  Wink, Al-Hind, 3: 206, 209.
18  Misra, Muslim Communities in Gujarat, 3–4.
19  Wink, Al-Hind, 1: 68–69.
20  In the course of institutionalisation of belief and practices there emerged four schools of 
Sunni Islamic jurisprudence, namely Shafa’i, Hanafi, Maliki, and Hanbali. Each school differs from 
the other in certain minute aspects of religious and social practices.
21  Richard M. Eaton, Sufis of Bijapur, 1300–1700  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1978); Richard M. Eaton, The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier, 1204–1760  (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1993); Richard M. Eaton, Essays on Islam and Indian History. See, also Alam, Lan-
guages of Political Islam.
22  In his study of Islam in South Asia, Muzaffar Alam has discussed this inherent tension in 
the Sufi Islamic tradition. Alam, Languages of Political Islam, 98–114, 151–167.
23  Susan Bayly, “Islam and State Power in Pre-Colonial South India,” in Marshall, et al., India 
and Indonesia during the Ancien Regime, 145–7.
24  The extraordinary flexibility of Islam and its assimilation or integration of local Indic tradi-
tions and rituals were not new but part of a process that began very early. Once Islam spread out of 
Arabia, the land of its origin, it began to accommodate aspects of other cultures, especially Persian, 
and thus a syncretic trend developed. Marshall Hodgson, Rethinking World History: Essays on Europe, 
Islam and World History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
25  In seventeenth-century Surat and Diu, the two prominent ports of Gujarat, the Hindu and 
Jain merchants outnumbered their Muslim counterparts, although some of the richest merchants 
were Muslims. M. N. Pearson, Merchants and Rulers in Gujarat: The Response to the Portuguese in the 
Sixteenth Century (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976), 103. On the Coromandel Coast, the 
predominant Muslim presence is reported at Porto Novo and to some extent, at Cuddalore, Karikar, 
and Nagore. Sinnappah Arasaratnam, “Factors in the Rise, Growth and Decline of Coromandel 
Ports circa 1650–1720,” Arasaratnam, Maritime Trade, Society and European Influence, chapter 9, 28.
26  See Misra, Muslim Communities in Gujarat.
27  For a discussion on the varying marriage rituals and ceremonies among the Muslims of India, 
see Imtiaz Ahmad (ed.), Family, Kinship and Marriage among Muslims of India (New Delhi: Manohar, 
1976); Roy, The Islamic Syncretistic Tradition in Bengal; Roy, Islam in South Asia.
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
16
28  To the extent that sometimes Muslims were regarded as half-Muslim (Roy, Islam in South 
Asia) or as “mere converts” and “persons of humble origins” as in the case of south-eastern India 
Muslims (Bayly, “Islam and State Power”).
29  Scholars have different views on usury in Islam. Sharia or Islamic law as interpreted by the 
scholar-theologians of Islam and as put into practice by the Ottoman, Mughal, or their successor 
states, does not allow Muslims to practice usury. In eighteenth-century Aleppo, the courts did not 
permit money lending on interest as it was considered usurious and thus against sharia. Bruce 
Masters, The Origins of Western Economic Dominance in the Middle East: Mercantilism and the Islamic 
Economy in Aleppo, 1600–1750  (New York: New York University Press, 1988), 153, 160–1. Here we 
find that, despite the “well-known ban on usury” in Islam and the courts’ disapproval, many Mus-
lim merchants used tricks to contravene the ban and extended or received interest-bearing loans.
30  Abraham L. Udovitch, “At the Origins of the Western Commenda: Islam, Israel, Byzan -
tium?” Princeton Near East Papers 9, (Princeton, NJ: Program in Near Eastern Studies, Princeton 
University, (1969), 1–12. See also his Partnerships and Profit in Medieval Islam (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1970).
31  Udovitch, Partnerships and Profit, 261.
32  B. G. Gokhale, Surat in the Seventeenth Century: a Study in Urban History of Pre-Modern India 
(Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1979); Gupta, Indian Merchants . Ghulam A. Nadri, “The Maritime 
Merchants of Surat: a Long-term Perspective,” Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 
50, nos. 2–3 (2007); Ghulam A. Nadri, Eighteenth Century Gujarat: the Dynamics of Its Political Economy, 
1750–1800 (Leiden, NL: Brill, 2009), 54–60.
33  Hassan S. Khalilieh, Islamic Maritime Law: An Introduction (Leiden, NL: Brill, 1998), 82–83.
34  Mirat-i Ahmadi: A Persian History of Gujarat, English translation by M. F. Lokhandwala (Baroda, 
India: Oriental Institute, 1965), 230. Differential rates favourable to Muslim merchants were common 
in West Asia and at ports under Ottoman rule. Patricia Risso, Merchants and Faith: Muslim Commerce 
and Culture in the Indian Ocean (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1995), 69. In Aleppo, revenue farmers 
usually collected 2.5 percent from Muslim merchants and 5 percent from non-Muslims. Masters, 
Origins of Western Economic Dominance, 138.
35  Mirat-i Ahmadi: A Persian History of Gujarat, 237, 256
36  Mirat-i Ahmadi: A Persian History of Gujarat, 271
37  A considerable disadvantage indeed for non-Muslim merchants, who often found means to 
circumvent such strictures. Thus, many Hindu merchants passed their goods through the custom- 
house (furza) in the name of their Muslim friends as alluded to in Aurangzeb’s instructions to his 
officials for the prevention of such acts. Mirat-i Ahmadi, I, 265.
38  At times, Mughal emperors exempted European companies from custom duties against 
an annual lump sum payment. In the early seventeenth century, the Dutch secured from Emperor 
Shah Jahan (1628–56) exemption from internal transit duties in Bengal. John F. Richards, The Mughal 
Empire (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 203. Note here that the English East India 
Company also obtained similar concessions.
39  At Mokha, Europeans paid a consistently lower custom on imports and exports than Turkish, 
Arab, and Indian merchants. At Masqat, English, French, and Portuguese merchants paid 5 percent 
whereas Arab and Persian Muslim merchants paid 6.5 percent and Indian merchants paid 8 percent. 
It was only in 1801 that Muslim merchants reportedly paid a low 5 percent custom while others 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
17
paid 7 percent. Patricia Risso, Oman and Muscat: An Early Modern History  (New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1986), 78, 83, 103, 193.
40  Arasaratnam, “Factors in the Rise, Growth and Decline of Coromandel Ports.”
41  Sinnappah Arasaratnam, “The Chulia Muslim Merchants in Southeast Asia, 1650–1800,” 
in Sanjay Subrahmanyam (ed.), Merchant Networks in Early Modern World (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 
1996), 159–77.
42 As noted above, to encourage student discussion, I have appended abstracts of several pri-
mary sources to illustrate these standard business practices as well as the challenges some merchants 
faced conducting business in early modern South Asia.
43  Commenda as a means of financing trade is a contract in which one person or party invests 
capital and the other person or party invests labor. John H. Pryor, ‘The Origins of the Commenda 
Contract,” Speculum 52, no. 1 (1977), 5.
44  The absence of liability has been a crucial aspect of commenda that distinguishes it from the 
Jewish practice of isqa and the Byzantium chreokononia, both of which place liabilities on the agents 
as well. Udovitch, “At the Origins of the Western Commenda;” Abraham Udovitch, “Commercial 
Techniques in Early Medieval Islamic Trade,” D. S. Richards, ed., Islam and the Trade of Asia: A Col-
loquium (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1970), 47–62.
45  Michelguglielmo Torri, “Mughal Nobles, Indian Merchants and the Beginning of British Con-
quest in Western India: The Case of Surat 1756–1759,” Modern Asian Studies 32, no. 2 (1998): 257– 315.
46  Arasaratnam, Merchants, Companies and Commerce, 282.
47  Ghulam A. Nadri, “The Commercial World of Mancherji Khurshedji and the Dutch East 
India Company: A Study of Mutual Relationship,” Modern Asian Studies 41, no. 2 (2007), 315–42.
48  British Library, Factory Records Surat (hereafter FRS), 75, Proceedings of the English Council 
at Surat, 24 September. 1796, 857–8.
49  Tamil Nadu State Archives, Chennai, India, Dutch Records from Surat, No. 1652, Doc. Nos. 
34, 37 and 38, Broach, 1765.
50  Irfanul Haque, Economic Doctrines of Islam: a study in the doctrines of Islam and their implications 
for poverty, employment, and economic growth  (Herndon, VA: The International Institute of Islamic 
Thought, 1996), 113.
51  Jafar Beg, the nakhuda, carried on trade in his private account. Dutch Records from Surat, 
No. 1652, Doc. No. 82, Surat 1760. Many of the nakhodas in Surat were “eminent” merchants and also 
acted as agents of other merchants and shipowners. Gupta, The World of the Indian Ocean Merchant, 
69, 418–19.
52  Dutch Records from Surat, No. 1654, Surat, 1763, Document nos. 40 and 55.
53  Bibliothèque nationale de France, Paris, Blochet 482, collection of Persian documents per -
taining to Surat, f. 28a–b.
54  Nationaal Archief (Nationa Archives), The Hague, VOC 1746, Translaat Persiaans contract 
van den Moors coopman Molla Abdul Gaffoer (Translation of the contract in Persian of the Muslim 
merchant Mulla Abdul Ghafur), 212–13.
55  Risso, Oman and Muscat, 100, 103, 114, note 51.
56  Thabit A. J. Abdullah, Merchants, Memluks, and Murder: The Political Economy of Trade in 
Eighteenth-Century Basra (New York: State University Press of New York Press, 2001), 94.
57  VOC 2104, Bruijnink at Surat to Matheus de Haan at Batavia, 15 March 1728, p. 62; Risso, 
Oman and Muscat, 192. See, A. J. Qaiser, “The Brokers in Medieval India,” Indian Historical Review 1, 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
18
no. 2 (1974): 220–46; M. N. Pearson, “Brokers in Western Indian Port Cities: Their Role in Servicing 
Foreign Merchants,” Modern Asian Studies 22, no. 3 (1988): 455–72; Nadri, Eighteenth-Century Gujarat, 
73–6.
58  Dutch Records from Surat, No. 1654, Surat, 1763, Document nos. 40 and 55.
59  Irfan Habib, “Usury in Medieval India,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 6, 4 (1964), 
417.
60  See, Haque, Economic Doctrines of Islam.
61  Mirza Masum, the son of a merchant Haji Zahid Beg, lent money on interest. Gokhale, 
Surat in the Seventeenth Century , 126. The presence of Muslim sarrafs in seventeenth-century Surat 
is documented. Om Prakash, “Sarrafs, Financial Intermediation and Credit Network in Mughal 
India,” in Eddy H. G. van Cauwenberghe (ed.), Money, Coins and Commerce: Essays in the Monetary 
History of Asia and Europe (From Antiquity to Modern Times)  (Leuven, BE: Leuven University Press, 
1991), 473–90. Some Labbai Muslim merchants of the Coromandel Coast were also moneylenders. 
Arasaratnam, Merchants, Companies and Commerce, 219.
62  In eighteenth-century Basra, Jews were the principal sarrafs and dominated this profession. 
Abdullah, Merchants, Memluks, and Murder, 90–1. At Masqat, Muslim merchants borrowed money 
from Bania bankers/brokers. Risso, Oman and Musqat, 200.
63 The percentage varied depending upon the risks involved, destination, and the duration of 
voyage. In 1749, the premium on bottomry investment of Mancherji Khurshedji on a ship going to 
Mombassa in East Africa was 15.25 percent. Dutch Records from Surat, No. 1644, Document no. 32, 
Surat, 10 Feb. 1749,127–9. On the voyages between Surat and Batavia the premium varied from 4.5 
to 9 percent. Dutch Records from Surat, No. 1652, Doc. No. 40, Surat, 1760; Ibid., No. 1665, Doc. No. 
123, Surat, 16 Jan. 1790, 315–17; Ibid., Doc. No. 161, Surat, 17 Dec. 1790, 401–3.
64  Although we have no evidence of any dispute involving a Muslim merchant, an analogy can 
be drawn from cases involving other merchants. One such dispute occurred in 1789 when a Dutch 
shipper in the service of the Dutch East India Company at Batavia took 2,000 rixdollars on bottomry 
payable at Surat but suffered loss on the sale of merchandise and was unable to pay the stipulated 
amount. He instead promised to pay only 1190 rixdollars to the authorised person in Surat. Dutch 
Records from Surat, No. 1665, Doc. No. 112, Surat, Dec. 1789, 291–2.
65  In 1784, the EIC lent money at respondentia on the Glatton sailing to Mokha. FRS 62, Letter 
to the Super Cargo of Glatton to Mokha, Mr. Thomas Porteus, Surat, 30 March 1784, 97; Ibid., Surat 
to Bombay, 7 April 1784, 109. In 1789, it extended respondentia loans to the merchant of Surat on the 
Winterton sailing to Mokha in order to raise funds to buy 2,000 bales of coffee for England. British 
Library, Bombay Commercial Proceedings 49, Consultations at Bombay, 3 Feb. 1789, 67–8, 76–7.
66  FRS 74, Proceedings of the English Council at Surat, 6 June 1796, 592–4.
67  Although Islam does not rule out the possibility of partnership trade with people of other 
faiths, in eighteenth-century Basra, out of forty-three recorded commercial partnerships, only two 
were between merchants of different religious communities. Abdullah, Merchants, Memluks and 
Murder, 92.
68  Joseph A. Spengler, “Comment on ‘Usury in Medieval India,” Comparative Studies in Society 
and History: an International Quarterly 6, no. 4 (1964): 422.
69  This is not unique to Muslims. Merchants’ behavior and their business ethics throughout 
the world, as Dwijendra Tripathi has argued, did not conform to their personal ethics or religious 
Nadri | Islam, Merchants, and Commerce
19
values. Dwijendra Tripathi, ‘Indian Entrepreneurship in Historical Perspective: A Re-interpretation’, 
Economic and Political Weekly 6, no. 22 (1971): M-60.
70  As Abraham Udovitch has pointed out, the prohibitions were based on two considerations: 
“the bias against unjustified enrichment” and “the exclusion of any chance or unknown element in a 
contractual relationship.” Udovitch, “Commercial Techniques in early Medieval Islamic Trade,” 40.
71  There were nevertheless digressions when merchants undermined the moral codes and 
violated their contracts. VOC 2054, Translaat messeer of algemeen versoek en getuigschrift door de onder-
tenoemene Moorse en Turkse kooplieden alle woonagtig binnen de stad Souratta (Translation from Persian 
of a general request and testimony by the under mentioned Muslim and Turkish merchants of Surat), 
29 Aug. 1725, 126–31.