Source URL: https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202412/17/WS67611ae6a310f1265a1d362e.html

=== Plain Text Content ===

Search
HOME
CHINA
WORLD
BUSINESS
LIFESTYLE
CULTURE
TRAVEL
WATCHTHIS
SPORTS
OPINION
REGIONAL
FORUM
NEWSPAPER
MOBILE
Home
China
Discover Xizang
Home
/ China
/ Discover Xizang
Potala Palace moving to preserve ancient texts
By Daqiong and Palden Nyima in Lhasa |
chinadaily.com.cn |
Updated: 2024-12-17 14:32
Share
Share - WeChat
CLOSE
The Potala Palace in the Xizang autonomous region has achieved notable results in phases in the protection and utilization of ancient texts.
Since the launch of the national project for the protection and utilization of ancient texts such as the Potala Palace palm-leaf manuscripts in 2018, more than 68 million yuan ($9.6 million) has been invested to advance the project.
The Ministry of Science and Technology has included key technologies for the protection and restoration of the manuscripts, as well as application demonstrations, in the national key research and development plan to provide technological support for their protection and restoration.
According to the West Scripture Printing House of the Potala Palace, the palace established an experimental restoration group for the manuscripts in 2019, with the main goal of overcoming difficulties in restoration.
The group has been conducting experiments for nearly three years, during which time it has accumulated a wealth of experience and achieved phased results.
Palm-leaf scriptures are sutras made in written or engraved form on pattra leaves. The content mainly consists of Buddhist scriptures. It is precious ancient literature and a first-class protected cultural relic in China, which currently has the largest existing collection of palm-leaf manuscripts in the world, the largest sample of which resides at the Potala Palace.
Pema Dekyi, an ancient manuscript restoration specialist at the palace, said the experimental restoration is preparation for later large-scale restorations. Currently, there is no mature experience or method at home or abroad for the process.
"Therefore, when carrying out the restoration work of precious cultural relics, especially a national first-class cultural relic, without prior experience or methods, the first step is to conduct a large amount of basic research and preliminary preparation," she said.
Photo
Clearance of damaged highway continues in Gyirong, Xizang
Xi arrives in Kyrgyzstan for SCO summit, state visit
Addled by myth, Japan heads towards abyss
25 Years of the SCO: Building a Shared Future
Snapshots from around the world
Xi emphasizes Mideast peace, Palestine issue
Top
BACK TO THE TOP
English
中文
HOME
CHINA
WORLD
BUSINESS
CULTURE
TRAVEL
VIDEO
SPORTS
OPINION
REGIONAL
NEWSPAPER
China Daily PDF
China Daily E-paper
MOBILE
Copyright 1994 - . All rights reserved. The content (including but not limited to text, photo, multimedia information, etc) published in this site belongs to China Daily Information Co (CDIC). Without written authorization from CDIC, such content shall not be republished or used in any form. Note: Browsers with 1024*768 or higher resolution are suggested for this site.
License for publishing multimedia online 0108263
Registration Number: 130349
About China Daily
Advertise on Site
Contact Us
Job Offer
Expat Employment
FOLLOW US
Copyright 1994 - . All rights reserved. The content (including but not limited to text, photo, multimedia information, etc) published in this site belongs to China Daily Information Co (CDIC). Without written authorization from CDIC, such content shall not be republished or used in any form.
