Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\jinapanjara_critical_study\research-notes\loop_F08\documents\1981-de_silva-paritta_fulltext.pdf
Total Pages: 48
Health Check: PASS (avg 3128.6 chars/page)
Total Characters: 150171

--- Page 1 of 48 ---
PARITTA 
A HISTORICA L AND RELIGIOUS STUDY OF 
THE BUDDIDST CEREMONY FOR PEACE AND PROSPERIIT 
IN SRI LANKA 
LILY de SILVA 
M.A., Ph.J)· (Sri Lanka) 
Associate Professor in Buddh ist Studies, University of Sri Lanka, Peradeni ya, 
F ulbright Research Fellow in Buddhlst Studies 1969-70 and VisitL11g Scholar, Center for the 
Study of World Religions, Harvard University, 1978- 79. 
A PUBLICATION OF THE N ATIONAL MUSEUMS OF SRI LANKA 
.. 
ix 

--- Page 2 of 48 ---
CHAJ>Tn~ l 
Introduction 
.;. PAR1ITA 1 is a v ery p opul ar Buddhisr ceremo ny in Sri Lanka. It is not an exag geral10n 
~say .that:-hardly a day pa sses without thi s cerem ony_ being perfo rmed in so me form or other in 
},' ~lmost every loca lity. Its widespread popul ;~ ri ty seems to be due to the fact that it can be 
· performed at any time, at any place for a vanely of p urposes, both secular and religi ous, wilh-
dign ified simp licity or pompous gran de ur as the occasion dc1r.and s, by anyo ne who wishes to 
'" nave it-perform ed. In fac1. the Sri Lanka Bro11dcasting Corporati on starts its daily programme 
i ,.Yitb the recita tion of an abrid ged version of the paritta for fifteen minute s at dawn. 
~ 
Thi s ceremony cent res on the recitati on, usuaUy by .Buddhist monk :» of extracts fron 1 the 
Pali Canon , collected in a text called the CatubhiiJJaviirapiili, Paritta or in Siahala 
Piruvii11iipotvaha11se. Its objective is to ward off dan ger, ensure protection and bless the sponsors. 
It is prevalent in oth er Theravada Buddhi st countries such as Burm a and Thailand as well, but 
this work is coufined to a study of the tntdition preserved in Sri .Lanka. 
This ceremony has a hist o ry which can be traced thr cugh record s scattered in Pali aud 
Sinhala liter ature . to the dawn of the Christian era. It has enjoyed royal patronage since the 
4th centu ry A. D. The bLLilding of a permanent pavilion for the recita tion of parirra by/I).. 
Parakramabiihu 1 in the 12th ccmu ry 1s an important mileston e iJ1 the course of its develo pment. 
Evo lving through so many centurie ~ it has absorbed several features fro in cootemporar) folklore 
nnd Brahman ical ritual pra ctices. From the simple beginnings traceable through the Pali 
comme ntari es, which are 5tn century transfat ions based on older sour.ce material, it has deve loped 
into a complex form wilh steadily increasing popularity, permeating all strata of society. Desp ite 
foreign domination, subversive missionary activities, and the resulting cultural change s which 
continued with increasing force and subtlet y thro ugh the last four centuries, this Budd hist 
ceremon y has survived with amaz ing enduran ce. 
Broa dly speaking , this present study can be di vided into three main parts. The first 
par t which extend s up to chapter IV, deal s with the meaning, con tent and histo ricity of the paritta. 
Th.e secon d, comprising clmpt er V, gives a derailed des c1iption of the ceremony, and its main 
types, as prevalent in Sri Lanka today . The third part att empts to t:i.ke a bird 's eye view of the 
comp onent parts of the ceremony from a historical persp ective to answer the · why and the 
wherefo re of all the ritual itppurtenan ces and featu res. lt is proposed to study thi s ceremony 
mainly from the point of view of oriental scholarship , Lracing its histo rical development to the 
present comple x form, and examining the cultural impo rt of the riut al apar atu s used, the 
symbolism involved and the fu nction il perfor ms in society . 
Yleauing of the word Plll'itta 
The Pah word paritta comes from the Sanskrit pari,'\/ trii ' lo pro tect; and it means 
prote ction. The correspondin g Skt. word is parilrii-,;a (pari+ trii+ana). The Pali has d ropped 
the suffix. Tn current usag e th e word paritra has a three-fold conno tati on. It means (a), a sutta 
or Buddh ist sermon , the recita tion of which ensures protect ion (b), the non-cano nical text 
com prising a co llection of s uch suttas and ( c), rhe ritual at which this collect ion is chanted. 
l Sinbab. Pirit. 

--- Page 3 of 48 ---
It\ 
The gradual semantic evolution or this word can be seen tlu·ougn o...anonical and - , 
commentarial literature. Its earliest simple usage is attested in a number of passages and , 
Vaf!akajiitaka~ can be cited as one such instance. Helie the present parti ciple parittiiyanta is -. 
used in the literal sense of protecting (oneself, afliina 1ri). Miitiipiiaro ...... ... ... mmn ekakal!l 
pahaya attiin{lm parittiiya11tii pa/iitii . Tr : ' Leaving me alon e. my parents have fled "lo protect 
themselves.' In the Sa111antapiisiidikcr paritta is used ro mean pre cautionary measures taken 
to stop a .fire:~ 
Ritualistic con norat ions of paritta too are to be noticed a!> early as in the Vinayapitaka. 
Bhikklwn ipiicittiya 5 which prohibits nuns from practising tiracchana11ijjii, 'animal sciences,' l 
exclu.dc ~ paritta from that category. Here the commentary 6 explains pariua as follows :­
Paritrall Ii yakkhaparitta11tigam(D.l(ia!adihheda1]1 sahbam pi vc'![afi, i.e. by parilta in this l 
instance all categor ies of paritta such as yakkhaparirta and m7ga111a1u/ala1 are understoo d as • 
permissible . However, originally in Lhe Vinayupifak.a the word may have connoted Buddhist 
suttas recommended for self-pr otec t ion, or p erhaps even non-Buddhist prophylact ic incan t ations 
designat ed by that name. Whatev er the case may be, Vinaya has looked upon them with favour , 
hence their exclusion from rir acchanavUJu. 
l<iimanitajlitaka8 shows the possibi lity of the existence of non-J311ddhist prophylactic 
incant atio ns ca lled paritla. According to t his source, exorcists employ thrc~ methods of treating 
a patient possessed by a demon , viz. balikarnma, sacrifice, parittakara1,1a, performance of the 
paritta , and osadha, mediciue. There is nothing specific in this pa ssage to ind icate [hat paritta 
means the Budd l1ist ritu al. 11 Neve rtlteless , sucb an interpretation can not be com pletely ruled 
out, especially when one recalls the very great impo rt ance attached to the driving away of 
demon~ and malefic influences in t h.e Buddhist cere mon y of later times. 
In lvf orajataka10 the protective incantation comp rising an adoration of the sun is called 
brahmamama. The vers e which immediately follows it, compr ising an adoration of Buddhas is 
called paritta.U Tile Jii.taka explains the word paritta here as ' protection ' (imarn pai itf af?l 
ima1]1 rakklia111).u It becomes clear , therefore, from these verses that certain inca ntations which 
were prevalent in pre- Buddhist Ind ia were acce p1ed by the Buddhi sts. Tbe fact chat this hymn 
2 J .. vol. r, p. 213. 
3 Yin. A .. vol. IT, p. 4 78. 
d. Parittam pi kut11111 Mffali, 1i~1ak11fikcmaq1 sa1111111tcl b/11r111i/Clcclzm111111 parikMik h<i11mia111 vii yarltii iigato 
aggi uptidanam a/ablzitv(l 11ibbiiti. Tr : One should take precautionary measures , such as clearing the 
ground or digging a trench right roun d the huts, so th'il.t the spreading fire will go out without linding 
any rue!. 
5 Vin. vol. , lV, p. 305. 
6 Vio. A., vol. TV, p. 937. 
Also referred to in Vbh. A .. p . 410. 
7 Most probably ynkk ltaparilla (pro tection from demons) means , 1/ci11ilfiy11 an<l 11ciga111a;1(lafa (protectio n 
from serpents) means Khancil1aparitta. 
8 J., vol. II, p. 215. 
9 8/itiravejj.i bh1ita)1ukkh idilli ama1111ssehi . . . . gafrlrassa bnlikamma·parirr11kara11a-oradl111-parihlriivitiidihi 
1ikiccham karonri. 
10 J., vol. If, p. 33. 
1 l Both verses are taken ovec to the Pari1 ra Lc:u .1s \furapa rma (S!'e n e~t ..::>ten 
l2 .I., vol. IJ, p. 34. 

--- Page 4 of 48 ---
1 
5 
wotshipping the sun was designated brahmamanta, i:i (or the noble spell) is also indicative of this 
recognition. Morajiitaka record s that the peacock who chanted this speJI, comprisin g both 
-verses, morning and evening lived free from fear and danger for a couple of hundred years. 
Snares failed to trap him becanse of the p ower or lhis spell. But, al Jong last, one day he forgot 
to·cJJant it as he was infatuated by the cry of a peahen , and on that fateful day be was trapped. 
Sucb was the efficacy of paritra ! 
Thus, from simp le unsophisticated beginning s, the word par itta gradually developed 
through canon ical and com.mentarial literature and acquired a ritualistic connotation. T his 
fully developed ritualisti c significance is explained in the following words :-
Antariiym1 1 parihara11tat!1 tiiyatfti paritfaf'!l ; parito vii sabbfipaddavato tiiyatiti 
pari11aq1 : mahiitejaMntaliiya samalltat o sattiinaT.n bhay@!1 11paddava111 upasaggaii 
ea tiiyati rakkhat iti vii paritlafl'l.u 
Tr : Parilla is so called becaus e (a), it protecl b by warding off danger ; (b), it gives 
protection on all sides or from all calamilies ; or (c), by che power of its great majesty it protects 
"beings from fears, calamiti es and dangers arising from all quart ers. 
As warding off danger aod assuring proleclion , peace and well-being are the 
-0~ject1ves, paritta can best be described as a prophylactic cerem.ony. 
Anal ysis of the Paritta Text 
The Paritta text, called Pirit-pota in Sinha.la, is an anthology of 29 suttas collected together 
from various pare s of the Pali Ca oon. Its older name is Catub/ziil)aviirapa{i (Cbp.) which means 
the text comp rising four chapters . Cbp. proper comes to a close with the 22nd, i.e. V 
A/iinii/iyasutta. The last seven suttas have been appended to it at a later dat e. JI* 
The following table shows a list of the parittas together with the identification of their 
sources and a brief descript ion of thei r content s :-
Suttas 
1. Sarm,1agama11a 
2. ~osa sikk/iOpada 
3. Siimanerapaflha 
4. Dvat1lq1slikiira 
'5. Paccavekkho!1ii 
o. Dasadlzammasutta 
7. 1Vfahiimanga/asutto 
'8. Roit1TU1sutta 
Kb. r 
Identi fica tion 
of source 
Kh. IT 
Kb.IV 
.. K.h. ill 
. . A. vol. IU, p. 388 
A. vol. Y. p. 87 
Sn. p. 46 
Sn. vv. 222- 238; Kh. VI . . 
Contents fo hrlef 
Seeking refuge in Buddha, Dhamm.a a 
Saogha 
The ten precepts 
Questionnaire a t initiation of novices 
Meditation on bodily impurities 
Correct atti tude of a monk towards 
requisites such as food, clothing etc. 
Introspection for maintaining the sp irit 
and purp ose of renunciation 
Lay ethics 
Invocation of blessings by the power of 
truth related to the .infallible virtues of 
Buddha, Dhamma and Sangha 
13 Though braitma and mantra both 01ean ' hYmn', or• song of praise' in Vedas, brahmo in Pali Is used in 
the sense of 'noble.' 
14 This is traditionally quoted by Buddhist monks at paritto ceremonies. It is ciced in the Ptili-Siq1/iala 
Pirit Pora p.i. !Roweve.r it has not been possible to trace any textnal reference for this passago. 

--- Page 5 of 48 ---
6 
9. KarmJiyamertasutra 
10. Khandhaparilta 
11, lJettii11i.1·m11sa 
12. Mitttinisarr1.~a 
13. Moraparirra 
14. Candaparitta 
15. Suriyaparitm 
16. Dhajaggaparltta 
17. Mahiikassapatrhera-bojjha1iga 
18. Mahtimoggalliinatthera-bojjhariga 
19. Mahiicundattl:era-boj)ltariga 
20. Girimtinandasutta 
21. /sigilisuua 
22. Afii11ii/iyasuua 
23. Dhammacakkappavatra11as1111a 
24. Maliiisamayasutta 
25. Pariibhavasutta 
26. Alavakasutla 
27. Aggikabhtiradviijasutta 
28. Kasibhiiradviijasutta 
29, Saccavibh01igas111ta 
Sn. vv.143-152; Kh. IK . . Cultiv-ation of benevolence (meu.f) 
A. vol. U, p. 72: Vrn. vol. Cultivation ofbcnevolen~~against snakebite- -d 
TT, p. 109 ft. 
A. vol. v, p. 342 
J. vol . Vl, p. l4 
J, vol. U, p. 33 
S. vol. 1, p. 50 
S. vol. I, p. 51 
Merit of benevolenc e 1 
Merit of sun worship an:i /or friendship and ~ 
loyalt y 
Adoration co sun and Buddha, morning l t 
and evening, for self-protection 
Lunar eclipse-Rahu releases moon on 
Buddha 's command 
Solar eclipse-Rah u rele:ises sun on 
Buddha's command 
S. vol. 1, p. 2l8 , . Allaying of fears by contemplating Buddha, 
Dhamma and Saogba 
S. vol. V, p. 79 
$. vol. V, p. 80 
S. vol. V, p. 81 
A. vol. V, p. 108 
M. vol. ill, p. 68 
D. vol. ID, p. 194 
S. voL V, p. 420 
D. vol. ID, p. 253 
Sn. p. 18 
S. vol. I , p. 213; Sn. p. 31 .. 
Sn. p. 21 
S. vol. I, p. 172; Sn. p. 12 .. 
M. vol. III, p. 248 
Recovery from illness t11rough meditarioo 
on bojjhariga 
do. 
do. 
do. 
Enumeration of Paccekabuddlras 
Sutta approved by Buddha on the­
recommendation of the four Guardian 
Deities for recitation by monks as a measure 
of protection against demons 
Buddlta's Firsc Sermon 
Celest ial recinue of the Buddha 
Gateways to degradation 
The conversion of a demon named ,ffavaka 
Who is an outcast 7 
The conversion of a Brahm.in 
Detailed exposition of the Noble Truths 
B~AVARA 1-SUITAS 1-16 
Sutt as 1-6 can be fittingly described as iust nictions specially intended for young novices. 
As a matter of fact suttas 1-9, with the exception of 5 and 6 also occur in the Khuddakapiifha 
which is generally regarded as a manual for beginner s. It may be that both texts Parilla and 
Kl1uddakapiifha evolved simultan eously to meet growing demands of an expanding Buddh ist 
community. 
On the other hand , if suua 3 can be igno red it would be possible to surmise that suttas 
1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 were prefixed to the Paritta text as purificato ry meas ures to be observed by monks • 
prior to paritta recitation. On this basis these suttas may be caned parikamma or preliminary 
duties, monks being expected to : 
(a) express faith in the Tbree Refuges (sull :t I) ; 
(b) observe the ten precepts (sutta 2) ; 
(c) meditate on the 32 aspects of bodi ly impurities {sutta 4) ; 
(d) cultiva te a detach ed non-indulgent attitude towuds t heir meagre requisircs 
(sutta 5) ; 
(e) kcep·constant watch over all actions a11d modes of behav iour (sutta 6). 

--- Page 6 of 48 ---
7 
lt is quitelikely tnat these suttas were prefixed as purificatory measures or pre liminary 
.J du cies and that sutta 3 may have been simp ly a dded to it followi ng the pattern of the 
Khaadakapii /ha . 
•. Sut:tas 7-9 
"ff 
At presen t these form the category known as great paritta s (Sinhala : mahapirit), and 
f they are invariably recited in all paritta rituals. But, accord ing to learned monks, tradit ion has 
earlier regarded Ratana-, Karw.1iyameUa- and Dhajagga-suttas as mahapiril.1 Suttas 8 and 9 
.appear to fonn the nucleus ro m1d which the whole idea of paritta pi vots. This will b e discussed 
in greater detail later {pp. 11-15). ln the Mahiivastu2 Raranasutta is intr oduced as 
svastyayanagiithii. 
l Suttas 9-13 
These five suuas seem to form a cognate whole as they pivot roun d the idea of 
mitta. The word mettii is an abst rac t form of the n oun mitta ' friend '. Karai:ziyamettasutta 
-deals with lhe practice of all-perva sive mettii with a deep sense of sincerity and humili ty to all 
.sentient beings o f all climes and times. K!uouil1aparitta recommends mettii toward s snak es by 
t forest-dwelling monks . The next sutta Mitt iinisamsa extols the merits of loya lty in friendship. 
C Friendsh ip is the average human l"elations bip which comes closest to me Wi, and it is the only 
f relationsh ip which is independ en t o f any biological necessity or u tilitarianism. Now the word 
mitra, · friend • is ~r: epithet of the sun god as well He who radiates life-giving energy to all 
-senteint beings witho ut d iscrim ination or expectatio n is a friend of all. Th us, while 
~ Mittiinisarnsasutta has the dual them e of friendship and Stm worship, the succeeding sutta is 
; unequivocally a !lOble spel~ " brahmamanta " for the ritual of sun-wors hip. It appears that 
the three themes (a), the active cultivation of universal friends hip (n.ieuii) (b), loyalty in friendship 
(miitlin.isaJnsa) and (c), the ritual of sun worsllip roughly corr espon ds to the jniinamiirga, 
.bhaktimiirga and karmamiirga or the H indu traditi on. 
Su.ttas 14-15 
During an eclipse, it is believed that the sun or the moo n, a s the case may be, is swallowed 
by the mythical demon Rii!tu. But, acco rding to these suttas, Riihu releases t hem wh en 
commanded by the Buddha to do so. It appears that a myth which was already current in India n 
society has been here utiiis ed to show lhesup remacy of the Buddh a over the m ighty sun-god, 
for the sut!a i·eveals that when the god himself is in difficulty it is the Buddha who comes to nis 
rescue. 
Sutta 16 
During the mythical war between god s and demons (sura and asura), the gods allayed 
t heir fears and gained courage by looking at lbe banners of their lcaders-Sakk a, Pajiipati, 
Van11,1a and ls{U)a. This su tta main tains that fears may or ma y not be allayed by the presence 
of these leaders as the leaders themselves are not free from fear . To overcome fears the monks 
·meditating in solitude are adv ised to reflect on the Buddha, .Dhamma and Sa1igha. 
According to the earlier trad ition this sutta fanned part of the mahapirita together with 
ihe Ratana and KaraFJiyametra-surtas.3 But in present practice it is replaced by the 
M altiimmigalasuua. 
1 cp. D A., vol. IJl, p. 969. 
2 vol. I. p. 290. 
3 DA. vol. UI, p.969 ment ions the three suttas as a sp::cial group. 

--- Page 7 of 48 ---
8 
B~AVARA II-SUTIAS 17- 21 
Sutra s 17-20 share a common theme. They all sb.ow how monks r.ave overco me physical ~ 
ailment s by con templ ating the seven bojjhangas, i.e. factor s or constituent s of knowledge . They 
seem to have been included in the text to illustrate, with speciiic example s, im:tances where acut e · 
physical disabilities have been cured with the help of meditation. 
!sigilisutta (No. 21) is a unique sutt a in the Paritra textas it contains an enLtmeracion of ~ 
Paccekahuddhas , nowhere else mentioned in the text. Accordi ng to Catubhiinaviirapii/i Affhakatha ' 
it was included in the text at this poin t because virtues of the Buddha. Dhamma and Sang/ru were 
extolled in previou s sutt as. 
BHA~AVARA ill A.ND fV-SUTTA 22 
Both bhii!;aviiras III and IV consist of only one suna, i.e. Atiiniit iya. The first part of the i 
sutta which contai ns a req uest mad e by the four Guardian Deitie s fonns hhii1:1m·iira m. The 
latte r ball' in which the Buddha conveys the deities' message to the JTtonks I 
forms bha~1avii.ra VJ. 
f According to this sutt a the fou r Guardian Deitie s inform the Buddha t.hat £here are 
powerful malevolent yakkhas who are disple ased with the Buddha and his discipl es and rhat they 
can harass monk s and lay follow ers. In order to ward off evil arising from them, lhe four 
Guardian Dei ties, with the consent of the twenty-eight yakkha lead ers, request the Buddha co 
allow his disciples to recit e this A°fiinii{iyasurta as a measure of protecti on. I 
Cbp. A. states that Atiiniitlya contain s the virt ues and powers of seven Sammasambuddlias. ~ 
Tt is placed last in Cbp. so that its power is augmented by being in association with tl1e parfttas I 
preced ing it. f 
Suttas 23-29 I 
This is a miscellan eous collection of suttas added lo the Cbp. at a later date. and the y are 
recited durin g over-night paritra ceremonie s as yugapiril (lit. twin paritta).~ The Dhammacakka I 
pavat tana sutta and the Mahilsamaya sutta are more popu lar than the others in thi s group . The 
latter is specially ment ioned as a favourite discou rse of the deities and is recommended ror 
in vicing good fortu ne.6 
Accordin g to Lraditional reckoning in Sri Lanka smtas 1- 21 are called ser pirit, i.e. sane I 
paritta (benedictory pa~· itta) ; suua s 23-29 are called slitra desw1ii (recitation of discourse~) : 
and sutt a 22 (i.e. U1e Afilnii!i ya) is called hamara desanii (conclu ding recitaticn) 6• 
There arc a few more Pali comp ositions, both verse and prose, which do not belong to I 
the Paritta text p roper, but which form an integral part of lhe chantin g in all paritra ceremouies. 
It seems fitting that a brief discussion of them should be jnc luded here. As they have been 
collem:d in an appendix to the Pii/i Sit.nhala Pirit Pota comp iled by the Ven. Kirivattu<;iuve 
Praj oasara Thora, they are taken up for discussion in the order in whiclt they appea; in his ed i tioo. , 
-! See below p. 4l-. 
5 DA. vol. II, p. 694. 
6 Cbp. and its commentary called Slirattl1asa11111ccnya end witb the Afii11iifiya:.11t1a. 
7 pp. 294-304. 

--- Page 8 of 48 ---
·:Vasi Pirita -Rain Parittu 
~ This is an invocation to produce rain. Though it is not possibl e to idemify the original 
~ .source oftl1is sutta in its present form, it is quite clear that the composition is based on the episode 
ft .of subhutittherw and Macchajiiraka. 9 This sutta is not popular at present , but it is know n to 
J1~v.e1>een recfred at the conclusion of paritta ceremonies dming periods or drought. 
.iinavum Pirit.a-Invitation to Gods 
This sul~a comprises a request to the deities residing in all quarters of the world to -
(a) come and listen to the word s of the Buddha ; 
(b) accep t the meri t dedicated to them and prot ect lhe ciispensatiou of the Buddha 
diligently ; 
(c) protect the worid and the dispen sation of the Buddha so that alJ beings may live 
happily in the company of their own friends and relative s and 
(d) ward otf evil and ensure protecLion au.d prosperity. 
After making this forrmll req uesL the monks announce the comme11cement of the ceremony . 
Ma~1ajinapaiijara-The Great Cage of the Conqueror 
i This is a very 1mportan t sutta recited in all pariua rituals andit is of special intere st to 11ote 
.;i. ~that there is not a sing le sutta in the Pali Canon which bears any resemblance to h. 
As the title itself indi cates the sutta attempts to buiJd a powerful. cage for the believer with 
'the Buddha stationed on the head , the doctrine (Dhamma) on the eyes, the Sangha on tbe cl1est, 
Anuruddha on the heart, Siiriputta on the dght, Km:u;'lafifia behind, Moggalliina 011 the left etc. etc. 
Again a cage is made of the paritras themse1ves, Ratanasutta in front, Metta_suita on the right , 
Dhajaggasutta behind, Angulimiilasutta on the left, with Khandha-, Mora-, and Atiiniifiya 
parittas forming a canopy above and the rest making a wall all round. The exh0rtation is that 
once the believer is encased or surroimded by these powerful forces, 110 disease, danger or enem y 
should harm him , because he is prot ected by the majestic power of the Conqueror. 
The sutta closes with Lhe following benedir;tion :-
"May all misfortune, bad omens, calami ties, diseases , unfavourable planetary 
conj1mctions, disgrnce, dangers. fear s and unlucky dreams be averted by the power 
of the Buddha , Dhamma and Sangha." 
The theme of Lhis sutta is quite alien to canonical literature and it seems to have been 
influenced by Tantn c literature. Jn Tantri c forms of v1orship nyasa is an important rite, and by 
it is meant the "imaginary plac ing of different objects (letters of the alphabet, sages, deitie s etc.) 
in different par ts of the body with which they are ident ified. "10 According to the Kuli.fr~tava 
Tantra, nyiisa is · so called " becaus e it places in the limbs the treasures acquired rightly 
-nyayoparjita, becau se it protects all, sarvarak~·iikara.n 
A poem by the name of Jinapa 'ijara is claimed to ha vc been composed by a famous Thai 
monk named Bucf(Jhacariya about 125 years ago , and it seems to be almost identical with our 
sutt a.12, 
8 Thag. A. vol. 1, p.25 
9 J. vol. T, p. 332 
JO Chakravar ti, p. 80. 
11 p. 124. 
12 I thank Dr. Saksri Yamnadda of Cbulalongkorn University, ""Bangkok, for this information. 

--- Page 9 of 48 ---
-
iG 
Aiigulimila Pfrita-A ligulimala Paritta 
Thi s is a special sutta the recitation of which is inten ded to facilita re cluldbirth. ll is 
taken from Ailgu/imalasutta of the Majj!timanik<1ya,13 and its efficacy is derived fro m the power 
of truth. According to the ./v.fajjhimanikiiya ~he Elder Angulimiilu makes an asseveration of 
truth (saccakiriyii), on the advice of the Buddha, tu ea~e the suffering of a woman who had b<:en t 
in labonr for seven da ys. 
Jay a Piri ta-Victory Parilt a 
T his is obviousl y a pariita composed at a much later date, bm no information is a vaJluble 
regarding its authorshi p. It is a prose composit ion, repete rive in character and abounding in 
alliteration. It ends wilh five metrical lines. T he gist of the sut1a comprises au invocation o f 
blessings for prosper ity, hea lth and longevity by the power of the Buddha, Dhamma and S01igha. 
The sutra is lengthen ed by a detailed enumerati on of the powers of t he Buddha and the Dhamma . 
However , this is not a sutta which enjoy s p opula rity at pres ent. 
Gini Piri ta- Fire Paritta 
This is a short paritta and ics first half is apparently modelled on the pattern of magic al J 
formulae in Mahayana texts . It is impossib le to give a coherent rendering of Lhis paritra. a nd 
i ts alliterativ e magical character can be shown best by quoting it verbatim. 
Jalo Mahiija!o jalarri mafliija/arrz jiilite maluijiilite Jiilitmn muhiijtilitafJI muldze t 
mukhe samp atte muklza1rz mukharrz sampattarri sutam gamiti suta111 gamfti migayiti 
migayiti di!(hii.la dantala mmJ(lalii. rokilli kiirafa dubbalii ritli ritti litti litti kitti kitri I 
cftti citti vitti virti multi mutti vu11i vutti dhiira~1i dhiira~1ili . 
When this is compared with a couple of spells (dhiira1Jipatla) of a few Bodhisattva 
Mahiisactvas cont ained in the S addliarmapuiufarlka, the resemblance is so greal that it leads to 
the conclu sion t hat the latter has had a consid erable influence in the composition or t he gi11i 
ptirita. rt is interesting to note the Sadclharmapuf.1 ~/arika view that dlriirar.ifpadti.ni are spells mean t 
for defence and protection. lt says, " by tho se talisma nic word s being prono unced out of 
compassion fo r creatures, the common weal of creat ures is promoted ; their guard , defence 
and pro tection is s ecured. ''11 
Bod/risat11•a M ahiisativa Pradii11asiira's spell is as follows :-
Jvale mahiijvale, ukke muk ke, a(le a{liirnti, trfye rrfy1frati, if1iii vi/ini ci(ini, 
tt{! i l[!yavati sviiha.1·& 
The !alter hal f of gini pirira is quite simple n.nd il consist:. of an invocat ion or blessings ' 
by t.lte po wer of tlte Budd.ha , and by the infall ib le truth of the statem ent that the Buddh a atta ined 
Enlightenment by van qui shing the five Jl.f' iiras and that he preached the Four Noble Truths 
therea fter. 
A!avisi Pirita-Pari rta or 28 (B uddhas ) 
In this poem the name s of 28 Bu<ldhas are enumerated from Ta\1ha1ikara to Gotama. d 
Blessings are invoke d by the power of their Lruth, virtue, equanimity an<l Gornoasgion. T b:: W 
idea of 28 Budd has i:> put fo rwa rd by the Budcll1a va111.~n. 
lJ M., vol. D, p. 97. 
14 Sat!d/1armapu!1c,larika, p. 372. 
15 ibid. 

--- Page 10 of 48 ---
11 
This is a very _popular pt1ritta recited inva riably in all paritl a performances . 
is . .JirvamangaJsgiith~A poem for Prosperity and G ood Luck . . 
:t This is a very popular poem recited at almos t a ll festive occasions. NearJy all school 
'f 1 children are taughr thi s poem. At weddi11g ceremo nies thi s poe m is recited in melodious tones 
n i by a bevy of young girls generally below the age of 10 yea rs, all dressed in white, and sra odin g 
'before the young c:cuple. At assembl y, in schools, stanza s from this poem are recited daily. 
The p oem con~ists of 9 stauzas . Each of the fust 8 recoun ts a feat of Buddha's victo ry 
e over a fierce, deceitfu1 and sLubbom opponem. A refrain rnns thr ough these 8 stanz as : "May 
1 you be prosper ous and fort un ate by the majesty of this victory ." The last stan za declares that 
f · 1h_ese 8 stanzas bring prosperity and good fortune. Whosoev er recites them dail y attajns safety, 
. : happine ss and re leas~ . 
It is believed by some tha t this med iaeval poem was compose d in Thail and.16 
M.altiijayamatigalagathii- The Great Poem of Prosperity 
This is by far the most imp ortant and popular poem in all paritta ritua ls. lt consists of 
16 stanzas which reite rate the invocation of blessing s and the prevention of disast ers by the 
p9wer of the Buddha, Dhamma and sa;1gha. 
-Ciibtjinapafijara - Lesser Cage of the Conquer or 
According to the .first p art of the poem Buddha s are station ed in all direction s, and 
blessings are invoked to djspel sorrow, disease and foar, and also danger s arising from demons , 
·dejties, kings, thieves, fire, ghosts, wild animal s. etc . 
In the second p an of the poem a cage is made for the believer by placing the Buddha on 
t he head, Siiriputta on the right , Moggallana on the left. Tipi/aka in front, Ananda behin d, 
A raha11ts in the four quarters and universal pro tect ors (lokapiil[f) on all sides. 
The i.hird part of the p oem comprises long cont inuou s benedictions . The conc luding 
stanza in the poem is custo mariiy recited during the distribut ion of paritta water and thread at 
·the conclusion of the rit u'1J.17 
Ori gin and Deveiopment of .Paritta 
The earliest occurre nce of the word paritta is To be .met with in the Vinaya Ciel!avagga1 
and the A1iguttara11ikiiya.e A monk is said to have died of snake bite, and when tbe matter was 
report ed, Buddha says lhel such an unfortu nate inc iden t would not have happened if the monk 
had prac~ ised meliiP :owards all snake s. H e then enjoins that monks s hould practise mettii 
1oward s all clans of snakes and s uffuse themselves with benevolent tho ughts for the sake of 
self-protection (alta -pari itaya). 
Buddha 's adm onllion to the monks advocated the acti ve cultivati on of mettii , 
the psychologiciil powe·· or which was capable of sub du ing even t he most ferociou s o pponent . 
l ts efficacy is \\dl attested in ::i number of episodes in the Pal i Canon . Metta is one of the four 
16 Wells, p. 291, fa. 1. 
17 See below p. 34. 
l Vin., vol. .a, p. 109. 
2 A., vol. Il, p. 72. 
3 Skl. maltrt, benevoltnce , compassion, loving kindness . 

--- Page 11 of 48 ---
,-
12 I 
t 
brahmavi/iiiras, a nd Buddh a has always extolled the virtue of practising it. ln 1·:.i~ 
Mettiinisa1nsasutta which meanin gfu lly fo llows K!taml/Japaritta in the Paritra texr enumernt corr 
eleven advantages of the practice o r metta. 011e of them is that a person practising met pur1 
cannot be harmed by fire , poison or weapon s . J'v/ti11oratlzaptira{1i' and Vis11ddhimagga~ ci~ whi 
instances where monks were protected by th~ power of meuii from these agenrs of dcst rucriov acq 
Uttarii upiisikii could not be burnt by bornng oil, Sumyuuabhri1)uka C17lasivauhe.ra was na 
affected by poison, and SaJ7/cicca siima/.1era could not be wouuded by a sword. Moreovci 
VisuddhimaggaG record s how a cow feeding its young c.:alf with in tense love was not harmed b\ tru1 
a hun ter's weapon becaus e of the power of meua. Niiliigiri the infariated elepha nt wru 
inst a ntaneo usly tamed by the Buddh a with this all-em bracing meffii. Such is rhe po wer of tlti! thr 
well developed mental phe nomenon, and Buddhists firmly belie ve in its efficacy to ward 06 
danger. Again, according co an episode in the Papaifcnsiidc:nii a monk who w:!.s listening l o th~ 
AriyavaJT1Sasutta was bitten by a poisonous snake. Althcugh be was aware cf ii he continuec 
listening witu rapt attention and faith. The poison spread and the puin becam e intense. He 
t l1en reflected on the un blemi shed purity o f fUs virtuous conduct (slla) from rhe time of lligher we 
ord inati on (upasampada). Great sat isfaction and delight (piti) arose within him when be realised of 
the spo tless nature of his characrer. This healthy psychological change acted as an a:itidoc~ SiI 
and he was immediate ly cured. Tt is further reported that he developed one-pointedness of th' 
mind (cittekaggarii) and attained Arahantsh.ip immediately. The Kuliirnkajataka is anoch.er. 
very fine illustration of the prophylactic efficacy of the practice of virtue. According to thisi be 
MaghamafJavaka (Bodhisalta) and his friends could not be crushed by the king's elephan t and! 
the king inqu ired whet her they possessed a charm which prot ected t hem. Tile Bod!tisalfa ! Pt 
replied that they observ ed the five precepts , cultivated benevo lenc e (mettii), gave a lms and did! su 
social service and tha t these were the mantra and paritta which they posses sed.~ N o bet te~ rn illus trat ion is needed of the concept that active cultivmion of virtue is pari1ta. di 
Again rcllection on the Klrandliapa r itta cogently suggests that thc Buddha advised the; w 
active culti vation of mettii, in t his case particu larly towards all snake s. to make sure that forest ' 
dwell ing monk s were well prot ected from a dang er to which they wc:rc consta ntl y exposed ! k 
Wit11 Lhe pass"ge of time , how ever, rhe injunc tion itself came to be popularl y regarded as a so rt h 
of mantra the mechanical repetition cl' which was believed LO ensure pro tection. I 0 
Though the Khandlwpar iLta can be co11sidered as lhe mosr ancient of the parirtas. the l: 
Kara~1iyame1tasutta has superscuc<l the former in importance . because it enjoins the cultivatio n 1 t 
of boundless benevolence towards a ll bein g:-. ....... human. celestial and anima l, known and 1 unknown, near and far, friendl y and hostile . past, prcsen. and. future wit hout any restr iction ; 
wherea s the Khandhaparitta is conce rned only with a panit:u lar ~p<' cies, I.e. reptiles. T hcrcforc .. j 
lhc l<m·a~1iyamettasutta with its greater com preh ensive ness form-; part of l he mahapinta, the. 
r.!cil<:tion of which is indispensable for al l parirta ceremonies . 
4 A., vol. V, p. 33. 
5 p. ] 3, 
!'.) ibid. 
7 MA., voi. I, p. 78. 
! 
8 J ., vol. I, p. 200. .Bodhisallo avoca : Deva aii1io am/lfikam manta 11iima 11a1tlti. amhe pa110 til! IS0111(tttfi' 
ja11ci pii{lalfl no lumlima, adilmom niidfyiima. micc/16 na cariima. 11111:.iiviitfal/1 ita kathema, majjam 11a­
pivii111a, mett11111 bluil'ema, <lii11a111 dema , 11wzga111 sama111 karoma, pnkkluv.1~1iyo klla1Jiima, sof11111 
kiirema, oynm amhaknq1 111a11to en pal'ittall ea vnddh/11 c:iri. 
I 

--- Page 12 of 48 ---
~~ 
:~ lQ' ' 
'j 
While mettii forms half the core them e of pariua, sacca (truth ) forms the other and 
complem entary moiet y. Paritta assumes that Truth , when solemnly declared with sinceri ty and 
purity, has the inher ent power of bringing abOLLt desired benefits. This is not a. new conception 
which origin ated in Bucldhism, for long befor e the rise of Buddhism , Indian rhoug ht was well 
acquainte d with the idea that Truth i~ the source and instrume n t of' great p ower. 
!t The heated hatchel doe s not burn the innocent for" the true -minded havin g covered bis. 
bf ·trne self by truth grasps the heated hatcher-he i~ not burnt and he is deljvered." 9 
afi 
.il 
11l1 
1-ei 
:q 
" l e is trut h which makes the eart h bear aU beings, truth which makes the sun rise. I1 is 
through truth rhat wind s blow and that waters flow. "Jo 
"On truth all the worlds rest and immortality depends on truth." 11 
(r!; It may also be noted in passing that this idea has continued in Sanskrit epic liter ature as 
!t well. For instance Damayanti resorted to an asseveration of tr uth when faced with the dilemma 
+ .0 f iaentifyin g her Nala.12 Sa vitri rescued Satya viin fro m Yama by the power of truth. u: 
:~ Similarly Sitii had recourse to thi s means to demonstrate the p urity of her virtuc.H 
le-
:Iii Such are some of ancient Indian beliefs in Truth and its p ower. Buddhi sm accepts the 
~ pelief that Truth has p ower and thi s conviction forms an essentia l basis of parifla. 
:Jj 
d 
j . n 
A1iguli111iilasurta of the Majjhimallikaya 16 furnishes one of the earliesi instances in the 
Pali Canon where truth has been thus utilised. The Arahanr Angulimiila takes pity on a woman 
suffering the throes of Jabour pains, and avers : " Smee my birth as a noble Arahartt I have 
never intentiona lly deprived a being of life. May you be well sister and may you have an easy 
delivery by the power of this rruth," and the woman is said to have gained immediate relief 
:l' which enabled her to delive r her child safely. 
ti i) Similarly in d1e Macchajcitaka 1s ihe .Rodhisatta is deeply moved by lhe miser y of his 
t kinsmen during a severe drought and prays lO Pajjun11c, the god of rain. He declares that be 
has never eareo or killed a living creature, even though he has been born among those who feed 
on one another. By the power of this tmth he implores Pajjun11a to produce rain. Jt is said thal 
:-. his prayer was granted ; the rains poured down, thus puttin g an end to their misery. Nowaday s 
this invocation to Pajjunna forms the Rain -parilta (Sinh : viisi pirita) though it is not form ally 
included in the Paritta text. 
The Ralan asutta which, according to tradition, was recited to rescue Vesiili from the triple 
scourge or drought, famine and epide mic, also embod ies the same theme. l t enum erates the 
-:. noble qualities of the Buddha, Dhamma and Sa1igha as infallible truths and in vokes blessings by 
their power. 
9 Ch., Up. VI, 16. 
10 Naradasmtti, p. 93, v. 213. 
11 Sana1s11ja1iya, p. 170. 
12 Mbb., V<maparva11, sec. LVII. 
13 Mbb., Vanapurva11, sec. CCLXLVL 
14 Rcimaya11a, Bk. VI, Cantos CXV!Il-CXX. 
15 M.,vol.ll,p.97 . 
16, .I. vol. I, p. 331. 

--- Page 13 of 48 ---
t • • 
14. 
Though not included in the Paritta text tl1ere are 1rurny episodes in PaLi ca nouicaI and i 
commentarial literature which centre round saccakiriyii or the asseveration of truth. The 
Km,zhadlpi'lya11ajiitaka11 records a sn:;;.ke-bire cure by an asseveration of truth. According to the 1 
Sambuliijarakal ~ Satr.iJUiil cures Sanlmsena of a skin disea :;e by s.1ccakiriy£i. Many more relevant 
episode s could be cited, but these will suffice .19 
The Angulimii/asuiuz reco rds •h~ plain and simple asseveration of rruth withom any 
accompanying ritua l paraphernalia. Bur the SuppiirakajiiTaka displays signs of the gradual 
growth of a ritual. During a storm , the ship in which the llodhisarta was trav elling, ran into 
grave peril. In order to avert che impending danger of bein g wrecked, the Bodhisatta p urified 
himself with a bath of seemed watei-, put on new clothes, and taking a vessel filled with water 
in both hand s de:;lured : "I do not recollect having intemioua lly deprived even a single living 
being of life ever sin ~e I reached the age when I was able to exexcise the powe rs of discretion. 
By the power oftltis tru th may the ship be safe.'' Tt is said that Lhe ship escaped danger and sailed 
away safely. 
I 
l j 
J 
In tltis way there began rhe gradual development of a rite around the idea of th.e l 
asseverati on of truth. The seemed bath and fresh clothes belong to the orde rs of preliminary 
puri:ficatory rit es, while the bow l of water forms part and parc el of Lhe ritual prop er. The present l 
paritta ritual h.as come a long way from these early beginniags as will be seen later on. However, l 
the belief in the power of met ta and sacca forms the basic strncture of the parifta ritual. 
The Vaf]zsat1happakiisi;zi20 (circa, IOthcentury A.D.) records that the Buddha protected the 
island of Lanka by reciting what is called mahaparitta, but no further information is availabl e Jl 
iu this conte xt ro j udge what comprise d this great paritta. According Lo the present tradition 
of Sri Lanka the Ratana. Metta and Malziimangalasuctas form a s pecia l group known as 
mahapirit, which is recit ed invari ably in all paritta ceremonies. learned Buddhist monks assert 
that t he Ratana, ;vfetra and Dhajagga are the sullas which were earlier regarded as mahapirit . 
and this contention is furthe r supporte d by a passage ~n the Diglla A f/hakarhfi'll which records 4 
this tria d as a special group ro be recited prior to the Afiiniifiyasu tta. Thou gh it is not possible i 
to ascertain exactly when lhe replacement of Dhajagga by the Maluimanga/a rook place, the I 
Ba~1a pirit kat ikiivata~~ mentions the new tria d for the first time. 23 However t he change see.t;nS l 
to reveal a significant social change, especially when it is remembered that rituais, in general, I 
bear a definite relationsh ip to social condi tions and aspirations of the people concerne d. 
The Dhajar;gasutia refers w a mythica l war between the suras and asuras, where Lhe suras 
are advised to look :u the banners of their leaders to overcome cowa rdice and boost courage . 
The sutta then goes a step further Lo add that rellection on the virtues of rhe JJudd!w, Dhamma 
and Sa1igha is a far more effective m~ans of banis hiJ1g fear. Th.is triad 1s a never-fa ilin g source 
of inspiration to all, including the leaders themse lves. The lvf nhiimmiga!asulfa, on the other 
ha.nd, spel ls o ut a lofty code or et hics for the prom otion of lhe Buddhist way of life. 
17 J .. vol. TV, p . 31. 
18 J., vol. V, p. 88. 
19 A(1{/a/J/11itajiitaka J. vol. l. p. 2159; Supp!lrakajtitaka J., vol. CV, J'. 142 ; .'vfugapakk!tajiitaka J., vol. 
VT, p. 2, etc. 
20 p. 81. 
21 Vol. ill , p. 969. 
22 PSPP •. p. 274. 
23 Perhaps. Sarat.iankara Sangliaraja, Lli~ great reformer of the 18lb century was responsible for this cha oge 
J 

--- Page 14 of 48 ---
1 -J 
Reflection ou the consti tue nt parts of the earlier maha.pirir group show s that they 
pjvot :round the following important themes, namely religion (virtu es of the Buddha, Dhamma 
and Sanglia in the Ratanasutta),interpersonal relations (a.JI-embracing benevo ience in Mertasutta) ;:;{< 
aua :political leader ship (inspiration from leaders hlp in DhajaggaswtaJ. It appear s quite // ·1 
meaningful that a ceremony which purp orts to promote wordl y prospe rity, should repeatedly 
stress the importance of these three aspects which are so vital fo; social harmony and coherence . 
'The replacem ent of the Dhajaggasutta by the Mahamaizg alasutta seems to tell the tale of 
a Changed social order. So long as Sri Lanka had her own rulers whose avowed duty it was to 
protec t Buddhi sm and the Buddh ist way of life, inspiration from p olitical leadership was 
meariingful to the masses. Once Sri Lanka lost her sovereignry and be.came the subject of a 
foreign power , inspiration from polit ical leadershi p Jost its relevance. Under such circumstances 
it becomes much more meaniugful tha t an effor t be mad e lo retain one 'c; own cullu raJ identity 
by the preservation of one's own cherished ideas and idea ls. The need for this may have been 
felt with greater lLrgency because the alien domination was reinforced by purposeful efforts at 
religious conversion. Therefore, perh aps, the obs olete Dhajagga was dropped from the 
mahapirit group. Its place was taken by the Mahiimangalasutta which emphasizes a code of 
social .ethics of a very high moral order. T o withstand the impact of a p olitical and cultural 
.revolution perp etra ted by a great fore ign power, the Buddhi sts may hav e tried to fortify themselves 
withmo rai strength hence the inc:Jusjon of the Maham01igalasutta in the grou p of mahapirit. 

--- Page 15 of 48 ---
Cl-JAPTl!R II 
Historical Evidence for Prevalence of Paritta as a Ritual 
The rudimentary beginnings of the paritta in K.handhasutta1, aud Aligulimiilasutta 2, have 
:already been noted. It is now proposed to tab ulate the availa ble data from Pali and Sinhala 
sources regarding Lhe prevalence of paritta as a tirual, adhering as far as possible to the 
{;hronological order of these records. As some of these records contain both early and late 
material chronological details of each work need to be given due considerati on. 
Milindapaiiha (Circa, first century B. C.)3, 
The l'tlilindapaiiha~ ment ions six suttas, namely, Raranasutta. K.l1andhaparitta, Moraparitta 
.Dliajaggaparitta, Afaniifiyapa ritta and A.ligu/imii/aparitta as parittas approved by the Buddha. 
it also discus ses the following problem s which reveal that paritta had alrea dy started to make an 
Impact 011 society as an effective means for ensuring peace and protection : 
(a) Can paritta avert death ? 
(b) How does paritta become effecti ve '? 
(c) When is parltra effective and when is it not ? 
From these poims of popul ar interest which have come within the purv iew of the 
Mililldapanha, it is reasonab le to surmise that the paritt a may have already become a healing 
ritual . Rati onal believers are puzzled over the relationship between paritta and kamma. Hence 
t he query whether paritta can turn away death, and if so how. T hose who were more sceptical 
have inquired after rhe mechanism of its operation. But it seems likely that those who had had 
it chanted and gained faith in its efficacy at times, wished Lo know under what circumstances 
it would be effective and under what it would not. The entire discussion, togetl:ler with the 
trad itional explanation given, shows that the paritta had alrea dy become a ritual performed 
at times of crisis. But it does not reveal any information regarding its organisation as a ritual. 
Vinayavinicchaya (4-5t h century A.D. ) 
The Vf11a.yavinicchaya affords the information that paritta water and thread were suppli ed 
to devotees on request. The ritual Jays dovm that the paritta thread shottld be mo istened wit h 
Paritta water before ic is handed over : 
Parittodakasuttan i vutte dethiiti kenaci 
jalam hatthena ciiletvii. majjitvii pana suttakal71-
diitabbaf!1 bhikkhuna katvii. Lesa111 eva ea santalcarrz 
attano udaka111 tesa111 smtam vii deti dukkaf af!'15. 
According to tradition the author of the Vinayavi11icchayc1 is a senior contemporary of , 
Buddhaghosa. lf the traditional view is accepted iL follows that Lhe Vinayavinicchaya is o lder , 
than the Pali comtucntaries. Thi s leads to the conclus ion lhat the earliest references to parilla 
water and thread are foun d in the Vinayavinic chaya. 
I A., vol. li, p. 72 ; Yin., vol. ll, p. 109. 
2 M .. vol. II, p. 97. 
3 But the pas.~e relcvauc co tile discussion may be ac least a couple o f cencuries later. 
W' ' .. l ~4 p.150. 
f17 \q 1rt 5 vv. 491-492. Tr. lf someo ne makes a request for paritta water and thread, the monk should stir the water • 
''\..\.v " with. his hand. moisten the thread aud hand over (lit. giving them full p Jss~si o n) . It is wrong, however. 
rtt ' to give away one·s own (i.e. a mcnl<'~) water and thread. (Wh~veT wishes to 11:et Parilla protectioo 
should prov ide ;;oater and ell.read). 
l 

--- Page 16 of 48 ---
'Pali Commentaries (Sth century A.O.) 
J>ara.matthajotika- rhe Commentary on K.huddakapa~ha
6 
17 
· The commenrary on Ratanasutta gives the following account regarding its origin. Tn 
order.tl:o save 1.he great city of Vesiili from famine, plague and demonia c iufine11ces the Buddha 
ca~ed .Ananda to recice Ratanasutta along the streets of Lhe city and sprinkle water Irom the 
Buddha's alms bowi. No sooner did the demons come in contact with this water than lhey 
:fled and . the epidemic subs ided . The people then constructed an assemb ly hall in the city, 
anemt~d-it..with all perfumes, tied a cano py above, de corated it in various ways and prepar ed a 
seat fori:he Buddha . After the Budd.ha S?.t himself on t his seat, the monks, members of the 
· royalty and the common subjects occupied appropriate seats. Sakka, king of the gods, arrived, 
·'l acco.m.J?anied by his celestial retinu e. Ananda also joined this congregation , together with the 
city fo1]<, after mal'..ing Lhe city safe and sec.:ure by reciting Ratanasutta. Then the Buddha 
t preached the same sutta to this entire assembly, and He repeated it for seven consecutive days. 
He farther recommended the recitation of paritta to avert simiJar calamities in the fulure , making 
J~ use of ritual paraphernalia employed i11 folk rituals. 
~· Th.is episode is traditionally recounted as the first paritta ritual. The imporLant rilualistjc 
fea~ observable here are the ritual water, the decorated hall p rovided with a cano py, and 
chanting continued for seven days . 
. Dbammapadatthakathi\ -Commen Lary on D hanunapada 
.Dighiiyukumiiravatrhu of the Dhammapada commemm-y7 provides 1urther evidence 
rega rding the development of the paritta ritual. Tn this episode, the Buddb.a demonstrates a 
. ritualistic device to avert the untim ely death of a Brahm.in's child. The Buddha advised the 
1 Brahmin to constrnct a l/WTJ{lapa (p~viJio n ) at the entran ce to hi s ho use, set up a small seat 
(pf/!iikii) in the cemre, arrange eight or sixtee1J seats around it and cause the Buddhist monks 
' to occupy them and chant paritfa for seven days cominuously. After all preparations had been 
l , made in accordance with the Buddha 's instructions, the child was placed on the centre seat and 
1 the monks sat round him and chanted paritta for seven days and seven nights without inte m1ption. 
1f 
er 
r, 
111 
On the seventh night the Buddha. too joined the recitati01i. TI1e demon Avarudd!taka who had 
come to seize the cl1ild found no opportunity. as the mighty Gods too had flocke d round the 
Buddha and his disciple s who were reciting paritta, and he went away disappointed. Thus the 
.:-hild was saved and he enjoyed longevity and was named Ayuvaf{efhanakum iira. 
The consrrnction of a special m(JJJ(lapa or pavilion with seats for the monks inside it 
chantingparitta for seven days and nights continuously, whi le the child who needed prote ctio n 
remained inside the m(Jf)tjapa occupying a central seat -these are certainly advanced ritual 
features not found in the Vesiili episode. 
S umaitgalaviliisini- Com.mentary on DighanikAya 
The commentary on Atiinii1iyasutra8 gives a graphic descri ption of the paritla as a ritual. 
· In view of its importance , and in order to give a complete pi et ure, tt free transl a tion of the passage 
' is given below : 
"These arc the preliminaries (parika mma) for the paritta : Afaniifiya shou ld 
not be recited first. For seven days the Metta, Dhajagga and Ratana suttas shou ld 
be recited. Thereafter if (the demon ) releases (the :patient ) it is well and good. if 
- ----
6 Kh. A .. p. 164. 
7 Dh. A., vol. II, pp. 235-239. 
8 DA., vol. ID, p. 969. 

--- Page 17 of 48 ---
18 
he docs not, the Afantl{iya should be chanted. A monk recicing the iitaniifiya; 
should not part ake of p::i.stries or meat, 9 and he sho uld not live in the cemetery, for;, 
the dem ons (amanussii, fir. non-humans) may get a chan ce (to harm). The site 
of the ritual i;hould be purified by anoinr iug it with fresh cowdung. A clean scat 
must be prepared for the monk to sit 0 11.10 When the monk is led out from the templ e 
for reciting the paritta , he should be sun·ounded by men armed with shields and! 
weapons . Paritta shou ld not be recited 111 the open air. It si:.ou1d be recited with 
i:he door s and windows closed, surrounded by anned men. u The monk reciting the. 
paritta must have his mfr1d filled with mettii. 12 F irst !he layrnco should be made tor 
repeat the Jive precepts after the monk and U1en pa:ilfa simu1d be recited. Jf the 
patient is not released even by these methods he should be made IO lie o n the cetiya· 
(pagoda) premise s. There an offering of a seat must be made (asa11apiija1?1 kliretvii) 
oil lamps shoLtld be lit and the ceriya premises should he swept. Then Mangalaswuv. 
should be recited. An assemb ly of a.II monks1s mttst be summoned (The demon" 
should then be addressed thus ). ' There is an old tree in t he temple premises. Th~ 
com munity of monks expects yo ur ar;i val there.' The demon. will be obliged to 
attend the assembl y.14 Then the patient who ls possessed by the demo n should b 
questioned : 'What is your name ?' When the name (of the demon) is announce~ 
he should be addressed b)' name : ' So-and -so, che merit resulting from the offerings 
of incense, garlands, seat and alms belong to you. J.'rfahii11:a11galagii£11a have been 
recited by ll1e monks to please you. Through respect for the monks you shoul 
release the patie nt: ff the demon still does not release the patient , the gods 1 ~ shoul~ 
be informed as follows : 'Do you know this demon does not obey us. We ther efore 
CMi)' out the Buddha ·s orders.' So saying pariua should be recited . These ar 
the preliminari es fot- laymen. 
If it happens to be a monk who is possessed by a demon, seats should be was he 
and an assembly of :1.11 monks should be summo ned. Merit of the offerings of tncense 
garlands, etc., should be declicarcd to tile demon and the paricta should be recited. 
These are th.e pre I iminaries for monks." 
This passage shows a marked development of the par it ta as a ritual from the earli er accouutj 
of Vesiili and Dighiiyukumiira. The idea of preliminary rites is fully accepted. Paritta lastin 
for seven days is known . The A!iinii/iya is recommended for recitat ion as a last reson. Th 
germinal stage of the presenl dt~y devadiitay<i (mes:;enger to the gods) and doralca1ia asna (ser mo11 
at the threshold) is also seen in rhe messa ge sea t ro the amanussa (demons , lit . non-humans 
and deva1ifa (deities). Arriclcs of worshi p such as incense, garland s <1nd oil lamps have hce 
utilised. It is also obviou s lhat paritta is beginning lo replace occul t practices. 
9 DAT., vol. IU, p. 208 : Fish, ghet! and fried cak~ too should he avoided. 
10 ibid. Personal cleanliness of the monk is also desired. 
11 ibid. This forms ext'crnal prvtecriou. 
12 ibid. This forms internal p1 .. Jtcction. 
l 3 ibid. p. 209. Living in the temple or in the village. 
14 ihid. Through fear of Buddha' s command and kings' comm and. 
15 ibid. yakkliaseniifiat fn!t•n. 

--- Page 18 of 48 ---
19 
Chronicles 
Mnhlivalpsa (6tb century A.D.) 
The Mahiiva111sa which ends with the reign or Mahiisena does not refer to any p01itta 
ritual conducted by a king. However, in the episode of the first co lonisation of Lanka 'by 
Vijaya, it is said that the god Uppalavcv.1~w. on the -insitructions of Sr:tkka, protected Vi}aya and 
his followers with parilta thread by the power of which the yalc9as were uuable to harm them.1 6 
Thi s is undoubtedly an anachronism appended to the legend of Vijaya after the parilla had gained 
populari ty as a prophylactic ritual. It is noteworthy that the Dipavmrzsa makes no mention of 
paritla in thi s context. 
During the enshrining of relics in tJ1e Great Stupa by Duf!hagiima~l monks are said to 
have recited the dhamma in chorus. T his was ca lled. ganasajjhayanii.17 If the paritta had been 
known at that time , it was a most fitting occasion to have had it recited . T herefore, 
it is reasonab le to surmise that paritta was not in vogue at the time of Duffhagiima(li's reign. 
However, gQ!Jasajjhiiyanii or recital of the dluimma in unison by the monks was performed. on 
auspicious occasioos.18 
C,;ilavamsa 
l The first recorded instance of a paritta ritua l conducted by a king occurs in the ) 
Ciilavamsa.19 King Upatissa I caused it to be performed when the country was vexed by a famine Vi/ 
j -·and-plague during the 4th century A.D. The king came to know for the .first time about the hl-;1 
recitation of the Ratanasutta by lnanda in the rescue of Vesiili, and resolved to perform a simila r j 1~ 1 ( 
ritu al. An image or the Buddha was fashioned out of gold, with a stone alms bowl filled with +-
water placed on the palms. This was mount ed on a chariot and taken round the city streets. 
The king and his subjects observed 11posatlta vows . The king went :!.long the streets 
of the city acc0mpa.nied by the monks reciting Ratana:mtta and sprin kling water from the 
Buddha' s alms bowl. It is reported that heavy rains came after the ritu al, and that the famine 
- and plague subsided. The king also decreed that this ritual be :perfomed during calamitie s of 
his nature. 
Aggabodhi I V (626-641 A.D.) is said to have had the paritta recited several times.!lO 
By the reigu of Sena II (851-8 85) the Ratanasutta had gained such prominence that he 
had it inscribed. on a gold plute and celebrated the occasion with a great festival. He caused 
the Abhidlzamma too to be recited. T hen he safeguarded. his subjects against the danger of plague J 
by having paritl a recited and paritta water sprinkle d.21 
·i In the lOth century Kassapa V (913-923) also had a par it ta ritual performed by the three 
~ fraternities in order to save his subje cts from. the perils of famine an.d plague. 22 It is also 
4- recorded that Kassapa recited the Abltidhamma with the grace of a Buddha , sitting in a mat)rjapa 
adorned with jewels, and sun·ounded by monk s.23 
16 Mv. eh. 7, vv. 9, 14. 
17 Mv., eh . 31, v. SG. 
18 But the Tiuipava171sayc1 which is a much later work states thatpiril was chanted tbrvugh out tbe night aftc1· 
relics were enshrined in the Great Stiipa ; this is obviously an anachronism. p. 200. 
19 ev .. eh. 37, vv. 189-1 98. 
20 Cv .• eh. 46, v. 5. 
21 Cv., eh. 51, vv. 79-81. 
22 Cv .. ell. 52, v. 80. 
23 Cv., eh . 52, v. 4.9. 
4-A49437 
.:,...1 ~""( "'t.tcrf~ ~ <\· Pq,cvr ,f­
t~i~t'- l(l.1 l·ttP'~-c.i/(.f~·.e~ P~'''< 
I /~kl'- ·hW1:-. 

--- Page 19 of 48 ---
Parakramabalm I ( 1153- 1186) is said to have built a permanent building called the 
Pctficasalfatima11dira fo r paritta ceremonies and distribution of paritta water and th.read.24 
During the reign of Part1kramabahu II (1263- 1271) a great heat wave had swept over 
Lanka with the threat of a severe famine . The king had several religious ceremonies per formed 
in honour of the Buddha , Dhamma and Sangha, celiya s and bodhi t.rees. In addition he caused 
a great conununity of monks to recite the paritta and bear the Tooth Relic roun d the city. It is 
recorded tha.t the rains came down and averted the disaste.r.~s 
Lastly, t·he Ciilava111sa records lb.at Kfrfisri Rajasi111ha ( 1747-1782) honoured Buddh ist 
111on~s with the four requisites and had the paritta and other salutary tex ts recited by them. 
Vmpsattha ppakiisini (t000-1 250 A.D.) 
The impact of paritta by the time of Va111satthappakasini had been so strong, tha t a paritta 
ritual has been anachronistically added on to the legend of the Buddha's visit to Lanka as well. 
According to this, after driving away th.e yakkha.s, the Buddha recited the mahiiparitta and tied a 
protective injunction.. 2a 
Pillimuttakavi nayavinicchaya (12th century) 
This work27 enjoins that monks should recite paritta for sick patients in an appropriate 
manner when requested by laymen. It emphasises that the thread should be moi stened with 
water before being handed over. When exorcising a demon, a palm leaf ( tiilapa1.11Ja) or a paritta 
thread should be tied on the hand or leg of the patient before reciting parilla. The text then 
repeats the same passage as foW1d in the Digl:a AtrhakathiJlS which descr ibes the ritual practices 
associated with paritta . 
luscri ptlons 
The paritta is also men tioned in some of the i11scriplions of Sri Lauka. The slab 
insc:-iption of Kassapa V (Circa A.D. 929- 939) lays down that only rhose who are familiar with 
the Catubhii~iaviirap tifi should be H.dmitted to the 0t:der.~!1 This is the first instance when such tt 
1..ondition had been laid down as a pre-requisiLe for ordination. Tl1e Tablets of Malii11da 1 V 
at Mihintale (Circa A.D. 975-99 1or997 - 1013)a0 enjoi.n that monk s should recite and practise 
111ec pirit (Pali metta paritta) before partaking of their mornng meal. al The Rock Jnscription uf i 
Pariikramabahu I (Circa I 153- 1186) decJares tltaL morJcs and novices are not permitted to enter ; 
the village at unusual hours except l'or some special purp ose. A jourucy to recite paritta at an , 
:i.ppoinLed place is exempte d from this. rule.32 An inscription of Nissa1ika111alla (ll 87- 1196) , 
24 Cv., eh. 73, v. 73. 
25 Cv., eh . 87, vv. l-10. 
';6 Va111sattlr11ppakiisi11i pp. 81, 95. dfpm·arassa rakk/1a11aUftiiya pan1tar11 kt1frii ii11at11 b1111d/1itl'ii . •. • 
27 pp. lJ-J 2. 
28 DA .• vol. ill. p. 969. 
29 EZ., vol. I, p. 55. 
30 EZ., vol. I, p. 78. 
31 EZ., vol. I, p. 99. 
3.'2 EZ .• vol. ll, p. 278. 
' j 
--

--- Page 20 of 48 ---
21 
A.D.), on one of the columns of the Niss01ikalatam~ujapa, establishes beyond doub t that this 
wtJJ.refapa was used for the purpose of chanting paritta . The inscription which was parti ally 
read in 1903:is was subsequently fully deciphered in 1915.84 It runs as follows : 
"maitrin loka siisana sanahii /oka vfJslnfa PUf.lyak,~etra kofa ayatana 
11issaf!1/ca lata mcn.u/apaye hitidii pirit (asana kiu;la) ma" 
Tr. This (is the pavilion for the hearing of)pirit what time (His Majesty), seated in the 
Sanctuary, the" Nissanka Flower-trial Hall," provides in loving-kindness a field 
of merit for the peace of the world-dwellers and (he Buddhist faith. 
1t is clear from this inscription that the royal sponso r was himself present within the 
mtIJJefapa. This had been a custom prevalent in the 5tb century too, for, Prince Dfghiiyu is said 
to have been placed in the centre of the m~efapa on Buddha 's instru ctions, when paritta was 
recited to give him long life.ali 
Though meagre this inscr iptional evidence is very valuable as it reveals the impact that the 
paritta had made on roya lty. By convention, the p aritta had been welded into the routine of 
, i he daily life of the monks and novices. It had also forged a very strong bond between the 
Buddhist clergy and the laity, to the extent that it had even caused the relaxation of some general 
and stringent monastic rules. 
• Sinbala Literature 
The classical Sinhala literature provides ample evidence of the popularity of paritta 
as a rituaJ.36 As the material is too copious only those data which mark a further developmen t 
" from ideas gathered through Pali sources will be discussed here. 
The Prayogaratniivall which is a medical treatise compiled by Mayurapiida, the author 
-0f Pujaviiliya, during the reign of Parii kramabiihu II (1236-1271), prescribes the recitation 
of paritta for infant diseases. It was believed that various demons affi.ict infants at different 
stages of their growth du..-ffig the first year. These demons should be appeased with appropriate 
offerings. Then the infant should be held over medicinal incense for a few minutes (osu dum di) 
and finally he should be bathed after pirit has been chanted (pir it karavii niivam1). The chanting 
of what is called biilagrahadosa pirit, i.e. paritta which is intended to ward off the evil influences 
of bad planetary combinations on children, is repeatedly recommended .37 The VaidyacintiimC11Jl 
which is a medical treatise written by a Tam.ii specfalist during the 15th century also prescribe s 
the chanting of pirir for infant ailments. lt also recommend s pirit for yak~a-preta- roga- cikitsa, 
i.e. for curing of diseases caused by demons and ghosts. 
The Da!ada Sirita which is a Sinhala work based on DiiJhiivairisa composed by Devrad 
Dampasailginavan (king's minister of justice ?) in the reign of Partikramabahu I V during the 14th 
century, recommends as follows : " When kings go into occupation of a new palace, the Tooth 
33 Arclweological Survey of Cey/011, Annual Reports, 1903, pp. 18-20. 
34 Archaeological Survey of Cey/011, 1911-1912, Cey/011 Sessional Papers 1915, p. lOO. 
35 Dh. A., vol. [[, pp. 235-239. 
36 Ptl}avaliya (13th cen.), pp. 63, 64, 442 ; Sl11hala .Bodhil'al?'lsaya (14th cen.), p. 213 ; Da}ada Sirita (14th 
ccn.), pp. 50-51 ; Sa1iga Sara(1a (13th ccn.), p. 8 ; Tl11ipavamsaya (13th cen.)1 p. 200 ; etc., etc. 
37 Prayogaratnavali, pp. 20-25. 

--- Page 21 of 48 ---
22 
Relic and the Bowl Relic should be taken in first along with the Sangha who will recite paritta 
sprinkle piril pall (paritta water) to protect the place before it is occupicd." 89 Again, it 
recommends that the Tooth Relic should be taken in proce ssion along the streets of the city in a 
beautifully decorated chari ot drawn by an auspicious eleph.ant, with virtuou s monks chanting 
paritta, holding the pirit huya (paritta thread) and sprin.\:ling piric pii11 from. a silver vessel.so · 
Paritta is also chanted during the preparation of medic inal oils, most probably to heighten 1 
their curative effect. The Sneha Satakaya, also caJted 1Je/1ei Tel Pota, attributed to the 18th-19t h 
century, recommends the recitation of paritta during the preparation of divyiingauiidi tailaya 
with paritta thread tied aU rou.nd.*o Accordin g to the Au~adha Muktiilzaraya, during the 
prep arat ion of he11ariija tai!aya too, paritta should be chanted and paritta thread shoukl be 
drawn all rcund . .u 
Conclusions 
A survey of the above material from original sources shows tha t the paritta may 
have become a ritual prevalent among laymen, perh aps on a sma ll scale, durin g th.e early centuries 
of the Chri stian era. Hence the critical and rational queries raised in the MilindapaJ1/za. It was 
recognised by royalty as a prophylactic r itua l for public welfare for the first time during the 4th 
century A.D. ( Upatissa I). The erection of a temporary mm:uf.apa for this ritual was known by ' 
the 5th century A.D:u The employment of ritua l accessories such as water, incense, garlauds l 
and thread, and the observance of preliminary puriftcatory rites, were also known by the 5th. 
century A.D. 48 The construction of a permanent building for recitation of the paritla by Kin g:; 
Pariikramabii.llil II shows that the ritual had become an integral part of the life of Sinhala ' 
Buddhist s by the 12th century A.D. Its usefulness in paediatrics and in the preparation of! 
medicin es, shows that the chanting of paritta was beginnin g to replace Brahmanical ocultj 
practices, and to grow in importance as a multi-purpose ritua l exercising great influence on tb.e! 
lives of an unsophisticated people. -t 
38 Da/adii Sirita, p. 50. Rajadaruva11 mtillga praveia vana kala pa/am11m da/mlii ptitra dl1</111va11mzsi! vaef! 
mahas01iga11a lavii pirit karavii pil'itpa11 isl'(i amk kara tunur11vam1/a ptija kara prav€ia va1111va ist'i. 
39 ibid. 
40 p. 17, v. 137. 
r.irit p11ravd mi/ va!a tida vedahu /anga i1ida 110/asi17e 
mu/ bu/at ran pa1i<!uru sadami.!1 uluru diga p11da kara111i11e 
41 p. 9, v. 66. 
viyan biiiida u{la s11ddha vilasi11 plrit huya 11.:ifu adi1111ii 
sot1di11 mantara pirit kiyam in beltet td siila lipa tiyun/1€ 
42 Db. A., vol. U, p. 237. 
43 Kh. A .. p. 164 ; D lo.. vol. Ill, p. 969. 
I 
4 • 

--- Page 22 of 48 ---
CHA.PTER V 
Paritta as practised in Sri Lanka Today 
In thjs chapte r an attempt is made to give a deta iled description of paritta as it is praclised 
in Lanka t oday. As this is a ceremony which can be perform ed with varying degree s of 
complexity three broad variancs of tl'\e ceremony will be o utlined which represent s a fair cross 
section from the simplest to the most elabo rate. The fourth set OLLt below is only a substitute 
ceremo11y conducted by layme n : 
(1) Sessional paritta (Sinhala : varupirUa) ; 
(2) All-night paritta (Sinhnla : tispiiye pirita) ; 
(3) Seven-day paritta (Sinhala : hat davase/smi pirita) 
( 4) Paritta recited by laymen (Sinhala : gihi pirira). 
The common factor which nms lbrough all these variou s forms is the recitation of 
sutta s from the Paritta text which have bee n alread y discussed (See pages 5-11 ). Th_iS 
is the indispensable feature in a paritta ceremony. Intelligen t monks and laymen believe tha r 
paritta recited even by oneself , whi le reflecting on the meanin g of the suttas, and conductiny 
oneself according to the prece pts of vjrtue is as effective as paritta recited -with ceremonia l 
Paraphernali a, if not more so. E lements of curren t folk magical practi ces are absorbed into the 
paritta ceremony as external embellishments to satisfy the anxiety of the masses, who hope fot 
magic to work at times of disaster. The efficacy ofpa ritta nevert.beless doe s not depend on thr 
accom1ianying ritual. lt is the practice among devoted Buddh ists to recite one of the suttas 
belonging to the mahiiparitta group every day either individuall y or collectively together wilb 
membc:rs of the family. at evening iueditation or at bed time. 
1. Varn 1•irita (Sessiona l Paritta ) 
This is generally conducted in three, five or seven sessions each lasting approxim ately 
one hour , there being two sessions each day morning and evening . The ceremon y can starl 
either with a morning session or witb an e vening session . Three-session ceremonies are quit e 
common , and those lasting for five or seven sessions a re less frequent. These are sometimes 
substitute s for all-night ceremonies which canno t be performed due to lack of personnei , time . 
and, most ofte n, mone y. 
Invitation 
The layman wishin g to have the ceremony performed goes to the monaste ry and invite s 
the monks . G enerally he take s with him a small gift to the monks according to hi.<; means , some 
tea, sugar, fruits. fruit cordial or some such appropriate item. Together with this he offeri; a 
sheaf of betel leaves to the chief monk , greets him respectfully kneeling at his feet and make s bis 
intenti on known. If the layman· s need is not very urgent the monk will fix a convenient date 1 
but if the matt er be urgent as in the case of a dyin g man , imm ediate arra ngements are mad~. 
31 

--- Page 23 of 48 ---
P repar:1tion I 
Preparation for the sessional pmitta is quite sjmple. The verandah or the sitting room 
is swept clean , a few chairs , according to the number of mo11ks invited. are placed in a row and 
covered with a clean white sheet. A small table is placed in front, also covered with a clean 
cloth. A small pot or jug of strain ed water, covered wit.ha wl1ite ke rchief is also placed on the 
table. A small cocon ut oil lamp, a tray of fresh flowers and a ball of white thread complete the , 
essentiaJ ritual objects on the table. Water mixed with turmeric is lightly spr inkl.ed all ovei­
tbe house to ensure ritual cleansing. If available a few grains of paddy roasted till it has popped 
(pori or vilai1da), mustard seeds and rice are sprinkled on the tabl e and aro und the place where 
the chairs are arranged. 
At the entrance to the house a basin of water and a towel are placed for washing and wiping 
the feet of the monks on arrival Some light refreshments such as orange juice, king coconut 
water or tea and betel leaves are kept handy in the house to serve the monks at the end of the 
ceremony. 
Preparation being thus complete, an elderly male goes to fetch the monks from the temp le : 
the monks are conveyed in a car if one is available ; jf not, the monks are conducted in a , 
proces sion, on foot, or they come on their own at the appointed hour. 
The Ceremony Begins 
When the monks arrive a young male member of the hou sehold washes and dries their 
feet at Lhe entrance. If the're are two boys , one washes and the other dries, but tbis task is never 
performed by a female as it is improper for a monk to be touched by a female. As the monks 
ente r nud occupy the seats prepared for Lhem, ev~rybody present respectfully greets them.1 Soon, 
two monks busy themselves converting the ball of white thread into a Lhree str~nd skein by a 
special simple method ; this is then wrapped round a rolled up betel leaf. The loose end of the 
thread is tllcn tied round the pot of water. The oil lamp is lit aud incense is b11rnt. Afte r these 
preliminaries are compieted the cerem ony begins. 
All the members of the family sit down in front of lhe monks on mats spread 1.rnt on Lhe 
grou nd, the person for whose special benefit the ceremony ls perfom1ed -a sick child or 
a pregnant woman -occ up ying the cemr al position. All clasp their hands in salutation. One 
of the monk s, generally the most senior, requests t he devotees to recite the namaskiircrya. 2 After 
this he administers pa11sil, (Pali, paficasila) i.e. he leads tbcm in reciting the fonnulae confessing 
1 Tho acl is called miidinava-Sec Reynolds, pp. 24-25. 
1 i.e. 'the salutation: .Vwno tassa Bltagm•uto Araf1att> Summiisambuddl1ussu. " f bow to the 'Blessed 
One, the Worthy One, the Fully Enlightened Oac" repeuted thrice. 

--- Page 24 of 48 ---
33 
faith in the Buddha, Dhamma and Smigha thrice. and the 5 precepts.s When this is completed 
thi: monks take hold of the three strand thread , now called pirit mi/a, i.e. paritta r.hread,d the end 
of which is already tied roun d the pot of water. The rolled up betel leaf round which the thread 
is wound is handed over to the devot ees. who. one by one. unwind the thread and take hold of 
it with hands clasped in salutation. The thread is gradually unwrapped to reach everybod y, and 
care is taken to see that it does not touch the ground , and tb.at nobody tread s or jumps over it. 
Thus, when aU taking part in the ceremony are connected by this thread , the monks starl reciting 
the paritta sutlas in chorus. The suttns generally chosen for recitati on are as follows :-
(i) Namaskrm1 
(ii) lti pi so JJhagavii . ... 
Sviikkhato Bliagavaili dhanm10 .. .. 
Supaf ipanno .Bhagavato stil'C1kasa1/gho5 
(iii) M alziima1igalas11ttao 
(iv) Mettasutta 
( v) Ratanasuttu 
(vi) Mahiijinapalfiarn 
(vii) Ciilajinapailjara 
(viii) Benedictory refrains. 
lf the ceremony is performed for the benefit of a pregnant woman , the A1igulimiilasu11a is also 
recited. 
At the end of the recitation the Lhread is r:olled back and placed on the pot of water. The 
monks are served with hot tea or coffee, or fruit juice, and specially prepared chews of bete I 
leaves. The devotees pay homage to them prior to departure. 
3 Budclham saraiwm gacchiimi 
Dhammam sarai10111 gaccizumi 
So1lghalfl sora!fattz gaccl1aml 
D111iyam pi Buddltam . •..... . pc . •. . .. •. 
Tatiyam pi Budtlha1;1 .... .. , .pe ....... , 
Tr. I take refuge in the Buddha, Dhamma and Swiglu1 
For the second time I take .. . , 
For the third time I take 
pii(11itipii;a verama{ti sikkMpadam smnridiy(imi 
adi11nidiinfi 
kiim esu micchticiirii .. .. 
m11sifviida 
surii111erayamajjapa11iiidn/ ffzii11ci 
Tr. I take upoo myself the vows of abstai ning frc m kHling. 
stealing, illicit sex, falsehood, und all typcscr 
intoxicant s. 
4 parittasuttaka is mc11liooed in J. vol. l . pp. 396, 399. 
5 D., vol. II, p. 93. Formulae extolling the \'irtues of Buddha, Dhamma and Sarigha. 
G Sec above pp. 5- J 1 for this and following suttas. 

--- Page 25 of 48 ---
34 
The same procedure is repeated for all sessions, be they three , five or seven. At the 
conclu ding cerem ony a few more formulae are adde d to th e recitation, to dedicate merit to 
departerl relati ves, deities, demons. niigiis and all living beings. Tb.e deities and nagiis are further 
requested to prote ct the people and the dispensation of the Buddha. 7 
The loud choral recitation ceases and a reverent atmosphere of fresh hope and well-being 
pervades. Respectfully the chief devotee rolls back the thread and hands it over to the monks . 
The person for whom the ceremony is special1y performed is the n summoned near the monks. 
OM monk pours paritta water into his or her cupped hands while all the monks recite the 
foJJowing formula in unison :-
Bharatu sabbam01igalat11 
rakkhant11 sabbadewuii 
sabbabuddhiinubhiiwma/sabbadhamn1iim1bhiire11a/sabbasa1ighii11uhhiive11a 
sadii sotthi bhavantu te 
lcc!titarr1 patthita111 tuylta1J1 
khippam eva samiijhatu 
rnii te bhavatvantariiyo 
sukhi dighiiyuko b/iava 
Tr. " May yours be all good fortune . May all gods protect you. By the blessings of all 
Buddh!!~ (Dhamnia :!. ~ d. Sa::6l:a) n~:is ye~ be v;::.11 arrd l1appy. May all your wishe;s 
and aspirations come to fruition immediately. May you have no danger to encounter . 
May you be happy and may you live long." 
Reverentially the devotee receives the water, drinks some of it and puts the rest on his face 
and head. Gen erally the water is not wiped, it is left to dry on the skin. 
After distribu ting the sac red parilfa water to a few in this manner th.e monk takes a piece 
of paritta thread about a foot in length by break ing .it wW1 his bands . No implement is ever 
used to cut it. Th is is moistened with paritta water and then tied on the right wrist or :mn of 
the devotee while reciting the following formula : 
Sabbe Buddha balappattii 
paccekiinafi ea ya111 ba/aJtt 
arahant{maif ea tejena 
rakkha111 bandhiimi sabbaso 
7 (a) ldai!l vo Mti11am hotu 
sukhirii !io11tu 11a1ayo 
Tr. May this merit accrue to your relatives, ma.y they be happy ! 
(b) Ettuv atii ea mnheh i 
sambhaca111 pult1iasa111pada111 
sabhe deva/bh11tci(sattii anumodantu 
sabbasampattisiddhiyii 
Tr. May all gods. non-human beings and creatures share in the merit wt: haw lhu~ accumulated ;:iad 
promote aJJ blessings ! 
(c) Akosauha ea bhumma{f/;ii 
deva 11iiga ma/1' iddhlka 
puf£1i111r1 /ulfl anumodiMi 
cira1ri rakklia11t11 siisa11a111f desana111/ma111 paiw1 1 
Tr. May the gnds aacl 110,f{(IS .:f mi~hty ? Owers residing in space and i:hosc inhabit ing 011 earth, rejoice 
in this merit and tnl:ly they pro tect for a lnng time tbc J ispens:nion (of the "Budtlhn), the teachings 
(of the Buddba ), myself and all others ! 
t .. 

--- Page 26 of 48 ---
35 
Tr. "AllBuddha s have attained great pow ers, and so havePa ccekabuddhas and Arahants. 
By the majesty of their powers I tie a pro tectio n valid in all respects." 
MonJ<s are permitted to tic the paritta thread only on males. In the ca1;e of females a layman 
ties it while the monks recite the formula. 
After the distribution of parilfa water and thread the monks are served hot tea or fruit 
juice and betel leaves and U1cy depart. Neighbours who wish to have paritta water and thread 
are also welcome to receive them . if there is water r,emaining, it is disposed of the following 
day or the day after, general ly in a place where nobody treads . 
This is the simplest fonn of the parilta ceri:!mony. But there arc.: occasions when paritta 
suttas are simply recited without any accompaning ritua l of water or thre ad. Such is paritta 
recited at the bedside of a dying person. Also where it is inconve nient to have ceremonial 
paraphernal ia, suttas alone are recited, as in the case of welcome accorded to State guests, 
farewells to distingui shed person s at their place of departure. 
2. TL' Paye Pirit a (The All-Night Paritra Ceremony) 
Preparation for 1his is much more elaborate and it is Hsual1y consi dered an expensive 
undertaking. Much n1oney is spent on enter taining guests and as a matter of fact the all-night 
paritta ceremon y bas become a socio -religious festival among wealthy Buddhists. 
:[\{o.nks are h"1Viled in the same manne r as described above (See p. 31). Invitati ons are 
also sent ont to friend s and relatj ons. About a week before the scheduled date the house is 
given a thorough deaning ; cobwebs are swept out, the floor is mopp ed and if mats are used in 
the household they are washed and dried. 
MaQQ'apa 
A temporary pavilion called the p irit mal}(fapa is erected for this ceremony in a convenient 
room in the household. The living room is generally chosen for this purpose. The material 
used for it varies witb taste, personnel and mone y a vailable. Cloth , paper or tender coconu t 
leaves (gok kola) are generally used. The shape of the mav.(lapamay be a square or an octagon , 
the framewor k is made of strip s of light wood. It is also possible to hire wooden frames, and the 
decoration may be done according to iod.ividu al tas te. Once the frame is set up the amateur 
artist gets ample opportunit y to displa y his imaginative talent. Sometime s paper cut into most 
exquisite patterns with floral designs or traditional motifs adorns the parittama~ujapa. Sometimes 
only tender coconut leaves are used together with strip~ of plantain trunks and habara (Diospyros 
ovalifolia) Jeavcs as accessories. Decoration with this material requires great traditional skill. 
It is an art which merit s special protective measure s beca use there are only a few at present who 
are versatile in this ancient and intrfoat e art. 
Entrance and Its Direction 
A ma]Jcjapa usually bas one main entrance , bi1t if space permi ts, it may h ave four openings 
on the four sides but only one serves the purpose of an entrance. It is considered auspicious 
to have the ;main cntm nce facing the east or north, but this may be disregarded where convenience 
demands otherwise 
5-A 4!!437 

--- Page 27 of 48 ---
UQu Viyana (The Can opy) 
Tue mm.ufapa bas a white canopy made of freshly laundered cloth (piruvata) supporte d 
by a network of twine irtlersecting to form squa res of approximat ely 8 inch es in stzc. On this 
net~ork, at regular interva ls, are hung certain kinds of tende r leaves. The var ieties traditionally 
used are said to be the following :-
Niigavalli Tender betel leaves (Piper betel) 
Niigapallava Te nder ironwood leaves (Mes uaferrea) 
Niigalatii Another variety of betel leaves ? 
Puvak ma/ Arecanut fiowers (Areca cateclm) 
Accord ing to some inform ants siviya dalu, tender leaves of the Piper chawya 1 and gammiris 
palul<cin, ten der leaves of black pepper (Piper nigrwn), are also used as traditionally recognised 
.dec or for the canopy. \.\ l1en it is difficult to secure the se varieties, especially in towns, substit utes 
such as Bo (Ficus rcligio}a) and nuga (Ficus bengalensis) !eaves are used. 
A row of rings ma de of tender king coconut leaves (Cocos nucifera, variety with pink 
epicarp) runs along the periphery of the canopy on the inner side of the ma~1 (lapa for the 
thread (piric huya) to pass through when the ceremony begins. 
Arran gements inside Mm}t;iapa 
A table of convenient size is placed in the centre, 
and chairs are placed all round alongsid e the framework 
of tbc maT;f/apa. A minimum of 8 :ind a maximum of 16 
chair s may be used , the exact number chosen being 
determined by the size of the 11u11Jrjapa.2 But an odd 
number of chairs is never used. A small table lower in 
height is placed next to the othe r table beside the main 
entranc e. All the chair s and the two tab les are cove red 
over with freshly laundered white cloth. 
fudra kila 
The two centre chairs directly opposite the main 
entr ance are cnllcd yuga pU!u, twin chairs. They are 
tied together and in the centre of the joint is fixed th e 
structu re called indrakfla . Riijagaha is anoLhcr desig­
nation commonly used for the same object ; rarely, it is 
also referred to as kapa~aha . 
Tbe indrakllu (fig I) is made with a stra ight freshly 
cut branch of a sziriya tree (Tlzespesia populnea) about 6 
feet in length. ft is covereu ove r witli a stilTwhitc new 
cloth pleated lengthwise and is tied ou to the branch in a 
cou ple of pla ces so as ro leave the cloth pllITing out in 
between the knots. A t lhe top, the cloth opens out to 
form a sort ofa •fan.' Sometimes a tbin red border is 
sewn on the outer edge of the ' fan . ' Behind thi s 
structure sta nds a small nrccanut palm with a fully 
opened coco nut flower . Some time::. the ran-shape I 
structure and the coconut flower are tied ou to tbc are -
anu t plnnt itself. ;\fter tbe indra!clla is set up women 
are nor allowed to enter tht: parirtamm:ujapa. 
1 Trimcn, vol. m, o. 426. 
2 Db. A., vol. JI, p. 236. a/l!ta va so/asa va iisan ini panflupell'!i. 
The Jndrakllo 
Figure l. 
' I 

--- Page 28 of 48 ---
37 
J(aran~uva (The Casket of Relics) 
A place is arranged on the right hand side of the twin chair s above the level of the heads 
of the monks , to keep the casket containing the relics of the Buddha. If it is very difficult to 
fix such a pJace the casket is deposited on the centre table itself. But it is always considered better 
to place the relics on a higher Jevel. 
run l{alas 
Eight pun kalas or vases of plenty as Coomaraswamy calls them ,s are placed round the 
ma~ujapa one at each corne r, if it is octagonal in shap e. Kalasa literally means a pot, but when 
used for ritual purposes it means a new clay pot in which a coconut flower is placed together 
witb a small cocon ut oil lamp. 
Lada Pas Mii! 
Five items of ritual import called lada pas mal (Pali , lajapaficama11i puppltiini, literally 
meaning five kinds of ftowen; with roasted paddy as the filth) are used to sprinkl e on the table 
and inside the ma~u)apa. The five items are as follows:-
Ela aba 
l taiia 
Vilaiida or pori 
Picca kuppi 
Sun sahal 
white mustard (Sinapis alba) 
panic grass (Hexeropogon contor tus) 
roasted paddy grains (similar to pop corn) 
jasmine buds (Jasmlnum officinale) 
broken rice 
PiiJl Kajaya (TI1e Pot of Water) 
A ne\\• clay pot or a well polished brass pot full of clean strained water is placed on the 
small tabl e. A fully open coconut flower is placed in the pot, or its mouth is covered with a 
white kerchief. Often the whole pot is beautifully decorated with tend er coconut leaves. 
So.metim-=s bottles 0f medicinal oil, talismans, and ever: small po ts co;:itaicing sand and pe bble~ 
are placed (Hl this table . The belief is that during the ceremony these objects get blessed and 
charged with p ower ; medi cines and talismans are thereby rendered more effective. Sand and 
stones are used as charms to prot ect newly built Jiouses. 
On the bigger table are placed a vase or tray of fresh flowers , whi te thread twisted into 
three strands and wrapped round the panicle of an arecanut flower , a small coconut oil lamp , 
and some hai1dun kiri pan (lit. sandal-milk -water). 
Haudun Kiri Pan 
This mixt ure is prepared as a purrn.catory agent to be used by the monks prior to 
commencement of the cer emon y. By custom it is never prepared by a female . A man scrapes 
some coconut on to 3 plantain leaf and squeezes it to obtain about half a cup of milk. Into it 
he adds some sandalwood paste , a piece of raw turmeric and the ju:ice of a lime which has been 
baked under hot ashes. 
Again, as a puriftcatory measure the whole house is lightly sprinkled over with /calla diyara 
i.e. water mixed with turmeric powder. 
3 Coomara:;wamy, Yaksns, II, pp. 61-63. 

--- Page 29 of 48 ---
38 
Tbe entire maTJ<lapa is beautifully lit up, or illuminat ed with small colour ed bulbs if 
electricity is available. 
Directly opposit e the house a small cnciosurc made of tender coconut leaves is placed 
at a height of about 5 feet. It is called the pa/ran piila,' oillamp hut', or ma! pt1la, 'ilower hut.' 
Inside it are placed a few betel leaves on which flowers of vario us colours arc neatly arran ged. 
A clay lamp with coconut oil, inc.:ense and camphor are also kept ready to be ignited at the time 
of the commencement of the ceremony . Once lit the lamp is kept burning until the end of the 
ceremony. 
Plenty of food and soft drinks are provided, and the household is a beehive of activity. 
F riends and relatives start arriving from early evening. Very close relatives and helpers would 
have already arrived one or two days previous ly. Nobody comes empty handed to attend a 
paritta ceremony. Pots of cur<l, t jns of biscuits, grea t big pineapples, excellent bananas and 
bunches of king coconuts 4 are amo ng the most popula r gifts that are brought . Usually an 
all-night pariua ceremony is followed by mid-day alms offered to the monks on the following 
day. The gifts thus brought are utilised at the alms-giving ceremony and for entertaining 
visitors and .neighbours . 
. A..ll visitc~ ~,1;'ho come tc pr:.rticiputc in th~ parit!a cerer:-iony are g~~erilly entertained either 
with dinner or with light refreshme nts. 
The Ceremony Begin;; 
The chief householder or his deputy goes to fetch the monks from the lemple around 
half past eight in the evening. Tl1e monks are generally condu cted in a procession accompanied 
by drumme rs and othe r traditional musicians, headed by tbe chief hOi.LSeholder carrying the 
casket of relics on h.is head surmounted by a canopy held in place by four othe r laymen. 1 
Nowadays, since cars are freelv avajlablc, this traditiona l and colourful part of the ceremony is 
fast disappearing. T he Parilla text and the Pirit lmya are also conveyed from the temple. 
When the monk s arrive t11eir feet are washed and d ried at the entrance as described in 1 
the account of the scssional ceremony. A person belonging to the washerman commuitity 
then spread s a Jong, narrow white cloth called pavii(la from the entrance of the house L1p to the 
entrnnce of tbe marpj.apa. The chief hou seholder (or bis depu ty) ceremonially conveys the casket 
of relics placing it on his head, and deposirs it in the mal)tjapa, 011 the shelf prepared for it. The 
m onks follow him to t he mat1(lapa, walking on the p iiva(la. 
Everybody present pays homage to the monks. From the time of arrival up to the time 
when che monks take their seals in the mal)<;/apa, there is sustained and loud drumming 
accompanied by the shrill notes of a w ind pipe. 
After the casket of relics is deposited in place. and the ola leaf manuscript of th~ Pnritta 
text and the pirit !mya are also placed on che centre table, the monks take their seatf according­
to senio1ity5• 
4 Tue warec of the tender nut is consiuereJ co p::>sscss spacial he.1lth-giviag properties. 
5 Seniority is rnckooed from lbc dnte of receiving the higher ordin ation, upasarnpatlii. 

--- Page 30 of 48 ---
39 
The pirit /111ya is an important ritual object consisting of a thic k white cord several yards 
long, wrapped round a large beautifuJJy fashioned bobb in mad e of sandalwood a bout 18 inche s 
loner. lt is a lways kept in tk mon:ist ery and is taken to all-ni ght paritra ceremon ies to which 
the "monks of the temple are inviLed. 
Tbe chief householder offers a tray of betel leaves to the monks aud formally invites them 
to chant the parirra. The oii lamps on lhe pun kalas are lit and sticks of burning incense are 
placed on the coconut flower s which adorn the kalas. Th~ monk s purify themselves by rubbing 
their hands with haiidu11 kiri pii11. Lada pas ma/ are lightly sprinkled inside the maiJ(.apa. The 
oil lamp in the paha11 piila opposit e the J1ouse is also lit and incense is burnt there . 
All devotees sit on mats with hands clasped in salutatio n aud recit e the namaskara, after 
which the chief monk ad ministers pafica sila. He rhen formally inquires of the chief hou seholder 
, the objective in performing the ceremon y. It mny be the death anniversary of a parent in which 
case the ceremony is a memorial :>crvici:: performed for the purpo se of dedicating merit to the 
deceased. Or il may be the approachin g wedding of a son or a daught er, or lhe constrnction 
of a new bottsc:, an d the cerem ony is performed for the purp ose of invoking blessings. When 
the objective is made known the monk delivers a sho r t sermon (anusiisanii) and commend s the 
householder for spending his time , energy and money on a worthy cause and in the fur the rence 
~ of a noble objective. The episode rega rding the rescue of Vesali by chanting the Ratanasutta 
is customarily related with a view to illustratin g ilie p otency of paritta and Buddh a's 
- -commendation of it. The story of how Prince Dighiiyu gained lon gevity by th:: power of paritta 
~-
is another favour.i le theme. lt is emphasised that the ceremony which is being presently 
' , 
performed has had a long hist ory, the present performance being the repetitio n of an age long 
tracLition. T he monk conclud es his short sermon with the assuranc e that this ceremony 
(pii71kama, ' meri torious deed ') perfor med with faith and piety will bri11g b lessings to all ta.king 
part durin g this present life and in all lives to come. The chief householder and the other 
·devotees then forma lly in'.'ite the monk s ~:i.therd in the: m:;~;;?apa to commence the ,jha11tillg 1..>i 
be parilta, by reciting thrice a standard verse which runs as fo llows : -
Vipattipa/ihiihaya sabbasampattlsiddlziyii 
sabbadukkhavinasiiya paritta111 briitha mmigala1?t 
sabbabhayavi11iisiiya paritta1ri bnitha mailgala111 
sabbarogaviniisiiya parittairi bn7tha mangala111 
Tr. " Be pleased to recite the 11oble parirza, for the warding off of calamities, the 
accomplishm ent of all prosper ity and the destruc tion of all sorrow, fear and 
iJl-health." 
The drummers now start to beat their dru ms in a prescribed beat (magul bera) for a few 
minutes. Simultaneously with its dramatic conclusion the monks start chan ting the paritta 
in chorus. The suttas chanted are as follows : 
(1) Samantii cakkavii/esu 
(2) Namaskiira 
(3) Pa(.iccasamuppiida 
(4) lli pi so Bhagava 
(5) Svakklliito 
J twitatio n to the gods to come and listen 
to th e paritta 
Salotation to Duddha 
D ependent originatio n (optionan 
Adoration of Buddha 
Adoration of Dlzamma 

--- Page 31 of 48 ---
40 
(6) Supappanno 
(7) Jayama1igafagiitliii 
(8) Bliavotu sabbamailgalam 
(9) Nakkliattayakkhablnit iinarri 
Adoration of Sangha 
Invocation of blessings by the power or 
Buddha 
Benedictory refrains 
do. 
The chanting up to this point is called pirit pe kirima i.e. performance of rites preliminary 
to paritta. This stops for a while and drummers start beating their drums again. All the monks 
stand up and tic tbc pirit huya in the manner described below, while reciting the following 
formula: -
Sabbe Buddha balappatta 
paccekii.nmi ea yal]1 ba/m'fl 
arahantiinaii ea tejena 
rakkham bandhirmi sabbaso 
Tr. " All Buddhas have attained great powers . and so have Paccekahuddhas and 
Arahanrs. By the majesty of their powers I tie this protection valid all round." 
It is tied connecting the casket of Relics, the Paritta text , the pot of water and the indrakila 
It is then taken up to the canopy and passed through the rings ma<le of tem.ier king coconut leaves 
fixed on the periphery of the canopy. in a clockwise directi on. 'When it has fu1Jy encircled thei 
canopy it is brou ght down and passed through the hands of all the monks before it is finally placed 
back on the table. The pirit niila, i.e. the three-strand thread wrapped round the panicle of an, 
arecanut flower is connect ed to the pirit huya at some point acnr the canop y. It is taken out of' 
the mQlJgapa and given to the devotees who are sitting around. Unwinding the skei.1 they pass 
round, each person holdi ng the thread with hands clasped in salutation, taking care not to let 
the thread touch the ground. Thu s, by means of thi s paritta thread all devotees get connected ; 
with the Buddha repr esented by the relics 6, the Dhamma represented by the Parirta text, the: 
Sangha repre sented by the monks, and the indraklla, the symbolism of which will be considered 
later on. 
After the p frit liuya and the piric nu/a are thus arranged. drumming ends and the monlcs. 
resume chanting in chorus. This pJ1ase is called maliapirila or the great parilta and it includes 
the recitation of the following suttas :-
(1) Mahiimmigalasutta (or Dlwjaggasutta) ; 
(2) Ratana sutta ; 
(3) Karw.iiyamettasutta f 
(4) Benedictory refrain s (ym11 dunnimirca,,1 ... . , dukkhappatrii .. . . , sabba buddlzi 
balappattii . . .. ). 
The mahapirita is considered to be the most important phase of the ceremo ny :rnd tht 
maximum number of devotees gather t o listen to it. After the mahapirita is over, !he piri1 nii/,1 
is folded and placed lnu:k on the centre Lable in the ma(1(iapa or on a kalas:z. The visitors art 
now ente rtain ed with refreshments, many of Lbe guesrs go away while close frie!1dS a1~d relative' 
remain all njghc. 
6 Vbh. /, ,, p. 431-tU1iit11su Iii //ii1iis11 B!tddlui fhiui va homi . "The presence of the relics is equivalcot to 
the presence of the Buddha:' 

--- Page 32 of 48 ---
s 
:s 
41 
Throughout the ceremony the monks are supplied readil y with plain tea or fruit juice 
whenever the necessity arises. A couple of men are specially entrust ed •vith the task of attenctiug 
00 the monk s. A neatly arranged plate of raisins, cand y (suk iri and Lalsiikiri), jaggery and ginger 
is placed on the table inside the ma1g/apa so that the monks can help themselv es whenever they 
need to whet their throat s during the chanting . 
After the mahapirita all the monks except tvvo, leave. Thes e two monks contin ue the 
chanting and this phase is called the yuga pirita, i.e. twin pariita. Seeton IV of the Parilla 
text, commonly called sulra defamt, is c hanted during this period. This y uga pirita generally 
stares around 11.00 p.m. and goes on till about 3.00 a.m., the monks being relieved in pairs , every 
hour. 
Whe n the yuga pirita comes to a close, the drumming starts again . Four monks enter 
the mai:u/apa and the two who were there leave. No sooner doe s the drumming cease th an the 
monks start chantin g the Ar.anafiyasutta. This is a sutta particularly recommended by y akkha 
leaders for recitation by Buddhi st mo nks to bring stubborn and vicious demons (yakkhas ) 
under contro l. As state d earlier, the commentary on this sutt a7 requir es that monks reciting it 
should abstain from eating pastries and mea ts (piffhaf!1 vii ma171sa111 va),and should avoid visiting 
cemeteries because demons (amanussci, lit. non-human s) would find opportuniti es to harm them 
(otiirarri labhanti). Th()ugh no t all the tractitional observance,<; recomme nded in the commentary 
are adhered to at present, recitation of the Atiinati_va is still treated with spec ial care and 
attention. Pare nts would take care to see that childn::n do not go o ut of the house during its 
recitation. In some areas much noise is made by striking metal betel trays wjth arecanut cutters 
or by jingling bunch es of keys. The monks too recite the Ap:iniifiya mttch louder than the other 
suttas. The sutta itselflays down that it should be recited very loud .8 In short , the tone of the 
ceremony during th.is phase , is suggestiv e of its purpose , namely exorcism. This sutta is populary 
known as the hamara which means ' the conclusion.' 
After the hamara around 5.00 a.m ., all the monks assembl e in the ma(1if,apa again and the 
following suttas are recited : 
(1) Kara~z iyamettasutta 
(2) Ya/'71 dun11im:itta1J1 
(3) Dukkhappat tii. ea 
( 4) Sahlie buddha 
(5) MahiijinapaFljara 
(6) Afavisi piriia 
(7) Mahiijayammigalagiithii 
(8) Cctiyapiijii (e.g. Vand1imi cetiyw71) 
(9) Patthana gathii (e.g. Jminli puFitzakammena) .. 
(10) Upa.fjhayii gu~1ut1arfJ 
(11) Samiikara giinlma (kayena vacc"i.) 
(12) Okasa dvarattayena 
Expression of universal 
benevol ence 
Benedictory refrain s 
do. 
Formula for tying the 
protective thread 
Great cage of the Conqueror 
Parilla of 28 .Budd1ias 
The great poem for succes s 
and prosperity 
Stiipa worship 
Aspiration 
Aspiration 
Prayer fo r remission 
Prayer for remissio n 
to 7 DA. vol. lll, p. %9. 
D. vol. Ill, o. 205 : ujjhaperabbarn vikka11dita&bam viravitabbam. PSPP .• v. xxx. 

--- Page 33 of 48 ---
42 
The cere mony conies to an end <1 rou11d 5.30 a .m. with the dist;ibution of parltta water 
and t hread. A monk takes some water from the decorated pot in to a sma ller containe r. The 
chief householder, or the person for whom the ceremony is spec ially pt!rformed. is summoned 
near the entrance to the mm:ujapa. All monks recite rhree stanzas from the Ratanasutta extolling ' 
the virrues of the JJuddlw, J)/wmma and Sai1glza. Ya17z lcii'i.ci vltta 111~, Yari1 hwldhaseuho,J0 and 
Ye puggalii11, are the tluee stanzas traditionall y chosen for tbis occasi on. This is followed by 
benedictory refrains such as Sabbil~vo vivajja11tu . ..... , Bharai!t sabhammigala111 . ..... , 
Nakkhattayakkhabhiitiinc;17-i. ... i 2 During this recitatio n one monk slowly pours paritta w:iter 
into the hands of lhe devotee who reverentially sips some of it and rubs the rest on l1is face and 
head. After the chief hous eholder. others follow suit. Then the monk takes a piece of t he 
pirit niila moistens it with the paricra wate r and ties it ro und the chief househo lder's forearm or 
wrist. lti pi so bhagava . ..... (i.e. adoration of the Buddha), and Sahba huddhii balappatlii . . . . 
(a benedictory refrai n) arc recited while tying the thread. Olher male devot ees fo llow su:it. 
T he monks then return to the monastery, and the morning mea l. is generall y prepared and 
sent t o t he mo nastery. But if it is intend ed to conclude the ceremony ,.,.'ith the morning meal 
(hil dane) it is offered to the monks in the house itself. Nearly aiways an ail-night paritta 
ceremo ny is followed by a mid-d ay o ffering of alms to the monks . 
Seats for the monks at the alms givin g co nsist of cushions arranged along th<.! walls of the 
dinin g room and covered with white cloth . The meal is also arranged on a white clot h spread 
on a mat in front of the sears . T he iniliv idual dishes are covered with discs cut out of banana 
leaves, an d t he whole array of dishes is covered \\'i th a white cloth . 
M onks are conducted aro m1d L0.30 a.m . While drum music is going on, rhei.r feet ar:e 
washed and dried at the entrance . The monks occupy the seats according to seniority and the 
drumming ceases when all have sat down. Firs t of all, a mea l is offere d to the .Bnddha by p lac ing 
foo d and drink in front of t he relics (buddhap uja) and all devotees sit down with hands claspe d 
in salu tation. One monk. generally the seniormost, requests the devotees to say the namaskiira 
The devotees generally get permis sion for themselves by merely saying•• May it please you Sirs" 
(avasarayi) and start reciting the form ula Namo tassa bhagaMto . ... etc. The mook then· gives' 
pansil and the devotees ' take ' by repeating the same, and offer the buddhapiijii with t.lle 
app ropriate stanza , 11amely, 
Adhivasetu no hhante piinlya111/bhojana11i parikappita111 
anukampa.72 upiidiiya patig{1ahiitu-m-uttama 
Tr. " Please accept Revercned Sir the drink and food which has been prepa red 
Out of sym pathy (for us) may the Noble One accept (this offering)." 
After this the monk delivers a sho rt sennou extolling the nobility of the meritorious deeds 
performed so far, from the previous night onwar ds. Meri t of paritt a a nd dana (cha rity) are 
illustra ted with episodes taken from the Canon. At the end, the alms are fonnally dedicated to 
lhe Sangha by repeating the follow.ing formula thrice : 
l ma111 bhikklza111 saparikkl:iira111 bliikkliusmiglzu.ssa dema 
9 Sn., v. 224. 
JO Sn., v. :!26. 
11 Su., v.227. 
12 See above fortranslation . p , 25 
i 
1 

--- Page 34 of 48 ---
r 
I 
43 
Tr. "Vle give this abns together with other requisile s to th~ Community of monks." is 
After this formal declil:atio o the devotees get up and starr serving the monks. The meal js 
1mcovered and water is offered first of all. Both males and fc::mal.e ~ can take parl in serving the 
roeal. With quiet digni ty, the monks partake of the meal which cousists of rice and curry, 
followed by a dessert. Fruits, sweetmeats, curd and treacl e arc served as <iessert The meal is 
concluded before noon and gifts of requisite& are formally presented. lt i.s customary to offer 
some appropr iate useful gift to each of the monlo: UL the end of a siii1ghlkadcina, i.e. an alms-gi ving 
dedicated to the emirt: Comm unity of monks. Betel leaves 10gethcr with the accompanying 
ingredients arr: also offered. 
Then follows the punF!iim1modana. the dedication of merit A special r.itual is performed 
to dedicate ir • .:rit rn the depa rted relatives. The chief householder take s a jug of water toget her 
with anolher empty bowl placed on a plate or a tray. Generally the bowl chosen for lhis purpose 
jssmal1erth an the jug as the wat.erpouredinto the bowl must overfiowits brim. The housebokler 
holds the jug of water above the bowl and pours it out slowly as the monks recite the following:-
U1111ame udakarri vatfha171 yaihii ni11naf}1 pavattati 
evam eva ilo di1111nf!l peta11a111 upakappatu 
Yathii varfraha piira paripurenti sagaram 
e\lam eva ito dinna;rz petii.nam upakappatu 
Tr. "Rain water fallen on high ground flows down to lowe r levels. Sirnil~rly may 
what is given fro m here reac h the departed ones. Just as swollen rivers fill 
up the ocean, even so may the merit dedicate d from here reach th'..: departed 
ones." 
While the monks recite thus, the householder slowly pours the waler from the jug into the bowl 
and it is so timed that when the mon ks recite the formula for the third time the small bowl is 
overflowing witb water. 
Merit is then dedicated to the relatives with follov.ting formula too, recited thdce by the 
whole congregation of monks and iaymen :-
l da/'/1 me iiati11a11z hoiu, sukhita homu fiiilayo u 
Tr. "May this merit accrue to my relatives, May they be well and happ y." 
On occasions when the water ritual is not enacted, the above formula alone is repea ted 
thrice. 
Merit is then dedi cated to the gods, spirits and all creatures : 
E1tiivatii ea amlzehi samblzatal]1 punfiasam.padarri 
sabbe deva/bhurii1&,/sattii anumodanru sabbasamyattisiddhiyii. 
Tr. " May the merit accumulated by us as a result of these good deeds be shared by 
all dt:ities, all non-human beings and all creatures, <llld may they ensure 
prosperity (for us)." 
J 3 By• other requisites' is meant otber appropriate gifts offered to the monks at the end of the meal, such as 
robes, towels, bowls, slippers, umbrellas, fans, soap etc. 
14 The monl~s re.cite this formula as Idalfl Yo natiu:up hotu . ... meaning• May this merit accrue to your 
relatives . .. . " The subsequent formulae for the dedication of merit too are recited in unison by 
both monks and laymen. 
15 Several meanings are recorded ill Kh. A., p. 166 : idlta panti amanussesu d11f(habbo. 

--- Page 35 of 48 ---
44 
Likasatrhii ea bhummattha deva niirrii mahiddhikii •• •• 0 
pufiiiarl'I. tarn anumoditvii ciran1 rakklzantu sasanaf'}1/desanam/marri parmrz 
Tr. "May all deities and niigas of mighty power, residing in the air and ou earth, 
accept this merit and protect the dispensat ion of tbe Buddha, teachings of 
the Buddha, me and all others." 
T11is is geflerally followed by the aspiration. The mouk says in Sinhala : " As a result 
of the noble meritorious deeds performed, such as listening to the paritta, offering alms etc., may 
all devotees who to ok part directly and indirectly , attain to greater and greater prosperity day 
by day. Having enjoyed health, wealth and good fortune during a long span of life may you 
al1 be born in eelesriai spheres. May you never suffer birth in any woeful state. After having 
enjoyed human and celestiai pleasures for a very long time may you attain the deathless tra11quility 
of Nirvana during the dispensation of the Future Buddha , Maitreya." 
f\Jl devotees present rejoice in these words and exclaim" siidhu sad/tu sadhu."
16 
The ceremony is over , the monks recei.ve obeisance from everybod y present, and they 
depart, taking with them the casket of relics, the Prn·itta text and the pirit huya. 
Now ~:tart s tbe :;c:::iul :l:>pcct of the ceremo ny. AH visitc:s a!ld neighbour s are entertained 
to lunch. No t:abies are set up, it is customary to sit on roats and enjoy the meal. 
The washermen and the drummers are fed in a separate corner of the verandah. AU others sit 
together on mats without any distinction and heartily enjoy a very sumptuous meal. 
l I 
Paritta water and thread are freely given without ceremony to anybody who wants it. , 
Everybody is in a happy and relax ed mood. The chief householder and his wife are generally , 
very tired , but the foti.gue is only physical due to lack of sleep the previous night and the amollnt 
of work put in for pie_para1iou of food and entertainment. But mentally they are very happ y 
that they have sm;cess!\1!ly carried through a great meritorious performance, a performance 
which gran ts prosperity for the p resent and security for the future. 
Disposal of Material 
Trndi tionaUy t.!1~ pcdlla ma"l'J<lapa: is not dcmolfahed until one and a half days pass, 
17 
but 
th ere is no hard and fast rule regarding the disposal of material with the exception of the coconut 
1 
flo:"en; . PGritta wate r an:.l. thi-ead are generally kept until the third day and neither is disposed 
of Jn a rilace where people tread . Any food remaining from dishes that were formally dedicated 
to tb e S.'.J.1ig/;a with tbc formula beginning Imam bhikkha11i is carefully thrown away. Such 
food, however clean, is never used for ente rtai ning lay devotees. tt may be given to an animal 
though ; beggars ~llso pr.rtake of it. The idea is that anything o[ered to the monks with thaL 
special rormula beloi:gs to the Community and it is not proper for a layman lo partake of it 
hereafter . 
. The cocon ut flowers which adorne d the pot of wat er and the indrakila arc carefully sto red 
.away ma very high place, generally the ceiling, of the house. They are believed to bring good 
lucl.c and prosperity. Villagers carry them to the fields with great deligh t, and there hoist the.111 
on iong sticks and plant them in the middle of the field. The belief is suong that thi s ensures a 
boLmtiful liurvest and fr\:cdtHn from pestilence. ~ 
16 The Buddhist equivalent of Christian' Amen.' 
17 wn vanivczk, three se~sions, i.e. evening of the same uay plus tbe morning and evening of the following 
d::iy. 

--- Page 36 of 48 ---
t 
l 
j 
11 
a 
45 
The oil lamp in the pa!ian piila outsid e t he house contin ues ro be lit for three cons ecutive 
nights. The pahan piila itself i~ not generally removed ; ir is allowed lo wilher there. 
3. Sati P irita (The Seven Day Paritta Ceremony) 
The seven day pariua cerem ony is cuRtomar ily K.nown as bwzavirlr (lit. paritta discourse) , 
and is mostly held in monastcri~s. But there is no thing TO prev ent the perfor mance of such a 
ceremony in a private household if all facilities can be provided. A ma~u;lapa is constructed 
in the same manner as for the all-night ceremony . but with more durable material. The indrakila 
described abov e is a ritual object particularly set up for seven day ceremonies, even though it is 
used for all-nigbt ceremonies as well. 
Lay supporte rs (dayakay6) raise fun ds for U1e cerem ony by publi c subscription , and they 
appoint a commillec of capable men to be in charge or various duti es co nnected with the 
ceremo ny. 
As a seveu day pariua ceremo ny is a joint effort of the clergy and the laity it calls for grea ter 
co-operation and co-ordination of du Lies. The refore , t rndi ti on h as drawn up a ba(wpirit 
katik iivata,i.e. a conven tion incorpo rating the duties oflaymen and clerg y regarding a bm;1apirita1• 
It is convenient to summarise the conten t of this convention here, as it gives a clear picture of the 
roles played by resµectiv e parlicipants and the proceedings approved by tradition. 
Duties of tbe Lay men 
Lay supporters wishing to have a seven day pm'itta ceremony perform ed should respectfully 
commurricate their intention to the chief monk of the temple and invite al least 25 monks. They 
shou ld make arrang ements to supply the monks with all requirements for seven days, such as 
regular meal s, refres hments , lod gings, sanitar y facilities, tran spo rt etc. From the comm enc ement 
of the ceremon y one or more responsibl e laymen should be appointed to carry out each of 
the following duries : 
(1) to serve the monks in the maJ;t{iapa ; 
(2) to pro vide drum mus ic at proper time s ; 
(3) to maintain orderly behaviour amo ng devotees ; 
( 4) to take messages for yugapirit ; 
(5) to look after the safety of the monks ; 
(6) to arra nge fo r a devadiitayii 2 
(7) to organi se order ly collectio n of subscript ions , keep accounts and set them aside 
for temple use ; 
(8) co prevent unruly gat hering, drinking of Jiquor and gambling in the immediate 
neighbo urh ood ; 
(9) to co-ordin ate process ions, lf any, comin g. from neighb ou ring villages ; 
(10) to distribut e without parti ality all gifts donated by the devotees, among monks, 
with the consent of the committee of monks. 
l Ba11apirit katikavata was forrrudly constituted by a 30 member committ ee headed by Ven. Tibhatuvave 
Sri Siddhartha Slllnc111gala, Yell. Va/arcika Ratw1ajoti Subillta, and Ven. A1111kka11e Sa1ig/wrakklti/.Ci 
Sartn.1aiikaraT/ieras in J 906. See PSPP. pp. xi, 273-284. 
2 See below p. 46. 

--- Page 37 of 48 ---
46 
Duties of the Monks 
A monk should not accept an invitatio n for a seven day paritta ceremony without first 
cons ulting his teacher and preceptor. After proper acceptanc e it is his obligation to attend the 
ceremony punctually. 
Monks should advise Ll:le laymen regarding tile construction of the ma~1</apa, arrangements 
for lodgings , procedure of the ccrcmoiiy, ancl th ey should also train the devadtilayii, the messenger 
to the gods. f o all dealings witb the laity monks should keep at a respectab le d istance aloof 
from them. Their behavi 0t~r sho uld iu 110 way engender <lisrespcct in the Laiiy. 
When participating in the ceremony mon ks should conduct themselves with pious <lignity 
and decorum. In cbantirrgparirta rhey should not try to excel one auorher as if in a competition. 
They sl10uld not band themsel ves into groups and indul ge in frivolo us talk. In all matters they 
should work \vith un.ity, amity and dignity. When one's mrn comes for yugapirit etc. oa.e 
should diligent ly attend to one's duty witho ut offering excuses of ill health.. In case of genuine 
ill health, the monk in cha rge of arrange ments must be not ified eurly so that alternative 
a rrangements cou ld be made without inconvenience. 
First Day 
An ac;scmbly of a11 monks participating in the ceremony is convened in the morning of 
the day sched uled for rhe ceremony to begin. With the unanimous consent of the Sangha, 
monks are appojntcd to carry o LJt the following duties : 
(1) to preside at the opening 5ession ; 
t2) to 'vrite the ~·ihara asna, i.e. llie message from the monastery, and the deviilapara, 
i.e. lctt e1· to the shrine of gods ; 
(3) to supervise the role of devadtitayii, the messenger to the gods ; 
(4) to play the role of anu§iisaka bhik,vu, i.e. to admoni sh the gods ; 
(5) lo deliver sermons (mo re than one may be appointed for the different days) ; 
(6) to arrange a time! tab le for yugapirit, giving names, dates and times ; and atte nd 
to the puri.ficatory measures of the ma~1{lapa (tevava bhik~u). 
All this is formally written down in the form of a documen t and signed by the chief 
incumbent. A committee representing the Sangha is then appointed lo deal with all aspects an d 
problems of lhis joint arrangement of the Sang/ta and laity . The office bearers mentioned earlier 
are also included in this comm itLcc. The main task of this body is to cnsw·e that all proceedings 
are carr ied out smoo thly. Should any differences of opi ni.on arise a.mong t he s ponsors or 
memb ers of the lay committee, it is t he duty of the Sa1igha comm ittee to intervene and settle 
disputes amicably. The committee also has to bear the responsibili ty of making alternative 
arrangements in case the time tab le already fixed cannot be strictly followed due ro unavoidable 
circumstances. In short the committee has to ensure the smooth uninterrupted performance 
of the ceremony by eliminating all shortcomings and making adequate provision for any 
emergenc ies. 
Devadiitaya-The Messe nger to the Gods 
At lhe time preliminary arrangements are made for the paritta ceremony a young boy 
about ten ye~rs old is chosen to play the role of the messenger to the gods. Generally a handsom e 
smart boy with a good clear voice is selected. A princely costume is made ready for him, and 
it consists of ::i. bright silk dhoti , a beautifully embroidered jacket, a pointed 2olden crown, and 

--- Page 38 of 48 ---
47 
plenty of jewellery. The boy memor ises the dorak.a{ia asna (lit. Lhc message at the threshold ) 
and practises it daily to be able to deliver ic freely on the seventh day of the ceremony. From 
rhe comme ncement of tl1e ceremony he has to rcsjdc in the monaste ry ancl also wail upon the 
monks chan1ingperiua , He is lreated with special attention by the laity throu ghout the pcdod 
of the ceremony. 
The Ceremony Begins 
Monks enter the m01:ujapa walking on the piiYiiefa one after the other, in the !>ame manner 
as for the all-night cer emo ny, after havin g had their feet washed a nd dried at the entra nce. 
The relic casket leads the procession of monks ; the pirit huya ancl the paritra text are also taken 
nJong. Drum mus ic got.:S on continuou sly until all m onks have take n thei r seats. 
After' giving' pansil to the devotees the monks them selves clasp their hand s in salutat ion 
and recite the following sunas : 
(I) Pa[iccasamuppada 
(2) Anekajati.va111siira;'}1 
(3) Iii pi so bhagava 
(4) Sviikkfiiiro 
(5) Su1TJafipa11110 
(6) Jayam migalagiitha 
(7) Bhal'atu .rabbammigalam 
(8) Nakk hatra yakkhablrr1tana111 
Dep endent origination 
F irst words of the Buddh a express ing joy 
Adoration or Buddha 
Adoration uf Dhamma 
Adoratjon of Sa1igha 
Invocatio n of blessings by the majesty of 
Buddha ·s victory over fierce opp onents 
·Benedictory refrain 
Benedictory refrain 
When these eight suttas are chan ted, drums beat again for a while, after whicb the monks 
resume chantiag the following : 
(9) Karaof yametta Sutta 
(JO) Ratanasuua (stan zas 3-14) 
(11) Y alJ1 dun11imitta11z 
(12) Dukkltappatt ii ea 11iddukkhii 
(13) Sabbe Buddha 
Universal bene,:olence 
Invocation of blessings by the power of 
Buddha, JJ!zamma and Smig!za 
Benedi ctory refrain 
Benedictory refrain 
Formul a used for tying paritta thread 
While reciting the last stanza all monks get up and connect the pirit huya with the relic 
casket, paritta rext, pot of water an d the indrakila and draw it through the rings in the ca nopy 
in a clockwise direct ion to make a compl ete circle as in the case of the all-night ceremony . One 
monk spr inkles paritfa wate r in and around rhe maJJ,<f.apa. Drums beat again for a while and the 
monks sit down agai n anti chant the following with han ds claspe d in salutation : 
{14) Namo tassa bhagarnto 
(15) l ti pi so bhagava 
(16) B uddham jivit apariyama,,1 
(17) Svakkhiito blwgavata 
(18) D/zammCIT'fl jil'i1apariya11ia111 
(19) SupaJ,ipanno 
(20) Swigha111 jil'itapariyantam 
(21) Buddha dhammii ea 
Salutation to Buddha 
Adoration of Buddha 
Confession of faith in Buddha for life 
Adoration of Dhamm a 
Confession of faith in IJ!iamma for life 
Adoration of Sangha 
Confession of faith in Smigha fo r life 
Jnvocatioo of Buddha and Dhamma to 
release one's mind from evi l 

--- Page 39 of 48 ---
48 
Proceedings up lo this poin t are dcscri bed as pirita pe kirlma in Sinhala, which means the 
performa nce of preliminary rites. The monks then wet th1::ir hands with haFzdun kiri pii11 and this 
icself is another purific atory measure. The two monks who are scheduled co start the chanting 
the following morning occupy the two centre chairs (yuga pu fu) and the others formally invite 
them to chant paritta, with the following stanza : 
Vipat tipa f ibclluiya sabbasampattisiddhiya 
sabbadukkhaviniisiiya parittam briir!za ma1igalarn 
sabbabhayaviniistiya pariilarJi bnitlta mangalarr1 
sahharogaviniisiiya pariuarri bnitha mQ/igalaf?t 
Tr. " Please chant the auspicious paritta to ward o lf adversity and rnvne prosperity. 
Please chant the auspicious paritla lo dispel all suffering, fear and disease." 
Drums beat for a while after which the two monks occupying t he two cen tre chairs start 
chanting the following suttas :i 
(1) Namaskiiraya 
(2) Sara~1iigamana 
{3) Namaskt'iraya 
(4) Dasa silo 
(5) Siimanerapai1ha 
(6) Dvatli1J1Sakiira 
(7) Paccavekkhw.1ii 
(8) Dasadhmnmasutta. 
Then all monk s join to cba m the rnahapirira which consists of the following sutta s : 
(1) Mahama1igalasutta 
(2) Raranasutta 
(3) Kar111.11yamettasutta 
( 4) Maliiijayamaiigalngiitlza (giifl 1as I, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8 and 9 onl y 
(5) Benedi ctory refrains. 
I 
I I 
All monks leave except the two continui ng the yuga pirita. Every hour or every two hours 
the monks are relieved by two ot hers and chan ti ng goes on co ntinu ously. Thrice a day morning , 
noon an<l evening the mahapiriia is chanted by all monks and each of these sessions is heralded 
by drum music . T his patte rn of yugapirit and mahapirit is repeated until the 6ch day 1 
Third Day 
Distribution of paritta water starts on the third day evening. Apart from this everything 
else goes on in the same manner up t o the sixth day wit h n on-stop chantin g. 
Sixth Day 
I 
This is a special day. Tn the eve ning the ma~1rjapa is redecor ated with fresh flowers I 
and lea ves. The lada pas ma! is rem oved and a fresh suppl y is sprinkle d. The leaves on the 
can opy and the coconut flowers in the k alas are change d. After redoing the ma1ufapa in this 
manner a monk ann ounces siiLra de.fanii, which means suuas chanted on this day are di1Tercnt 
tl) chose which have becu chanted so far. The seven s1mas which form :in appendi x to 
Cawhliiii:taviirapii/i are chanted in t he ord er in which they are arranged in t he paritta tex1. 
Beati ng of drums heralds thi s sucra desanti. 
3 See above p. 5-11. 

--- Page 40 of 48 ---
49 
Sefenth Day 
As on other days mahapirita is chanted by all monks in the morning and two monks 
continu e the yugc1 pirita. Around 9 a.m. all lhe monks assemble in rbe ma~1(lapa again, and all 
hold the pirit huya. Yuga pirila is temporarily stopped, and the t wo monk.~ sit silently in their 
seats. Th e monk who bas been appointed to write the deviilapata, i.e. the letLer to the shrin e of 
the gods, takes his stand on the right side of the table and announce s the a lmanac (lit a kiyavana11ii~ 
i.e. the year, monlb, day, date, hour, moment and planetary conjun ctions of the moment. Theo 
the anusiisaka bhik$u. the monk who is appointed to admoni sh the gods, stands on the left 
side of the table and starts writing the i•ibiira asna, rbe message from the monastery. 'J-ie 
then reads out what he wrote . Tue former then writes out the devalapata while standi ng there 
itself and reads it out. Once the task of writing out the rwo messages is over all except two leave 
and yuga pirita resumes . 
Vi!lara AsnaG 
Thjs is a long document run ning Lo about Lwo and a half pr inted pages. The rncssngc in 
short is as follows : 
"Today u paritfa ceremony takes place in this monastery. The Community 
of monks w1animously requests that all deities residing ju varjous shrines , temples 
etc . (a long list is mentioned by place names and this makes the document quire long) 
come and listen to the mangalasutta etc. and share in the merit thereof. They 
must not disobey the orders of the Community of monks and they must come 
together with their retin ues.'· 
Dev iii apata s 
Thi s is a shorter document and it is an individual invitation to the gods residing in a 
particular shrine close lo the monastery where the ceremony is conducted . Its messag e is as 
follows·-
"Today piril js bejn g chanted jn this monastery which is clcsc to such and 
such a shrine of the gods . Tbe Community of monks desires that all gods residing 
in this deviila should come without except.ion together with their retinues. Tbey 
must come without disob eying the order of the Community." 
Before evening five palm leaf copies of these t\vo docu ments are made. ln the evening 
monks assembk aga in in or around the niatu),e1pa and screen off a portion of it or the whole 
mat;1~lap a. They take the messenger to the gods too into the enclosure, now fully dressed in 
his special princely costume with crown on bead. Here the monks tie the devalakada. the pingo 
for the abo de of gods. lt is also called hemakada, the golde n pin go. One copy of each docume"nt 
is left in tbe 111Gf.1{/apa. The other four copies are rolled up_ SJJriuklcd over with turmeric wate1 
and lightl y ful1UgRted with burning illcense. After this ritual cleansing , the scrolls are placed 
in the small pingo decorated with sprigs of betel leaves (bulat palukiiu) aud arecanut .flowers. 
t The mes senger il> accompanied by two, four, or eight attendants called dora1upalayo- they are 
J . boys around Len years of age,drcs~ed ii1 beautifui dhoti and jacket, but not as grandly as ttc 
4 rsrr. p. 284. 
5 ibid. p. 2~7. 

--- Page 41 of 48 ---
I 
50 
messenger. They carry swords and stand as guards on either side of the messenge r. The 
anU.Siisaka bhik$u, the monk designated to admonish the gods, 'gives' pansil to the messenge r, 
his attendants and the retinue accompa11ying him to the deviilaya,aud gives them paritta wate r. 
He then hands over to the messenge r a small decanter of paritta water , oil, flowers, incense 
and other articles of worshi p .Finally he entrusts to him the hemakada containing the message 
to be delivered to the gods. 
The procession sets out with drum s beating. The messenger is flanked by his atten dants ~ 
and surrounded by people carrying swords , fio.gs und banners. Sometime s the procession is i 
organised on such a grand scale as to take the messenger on elephant back (Plate VIlI) or ina •· 
beautifully decorated cart. vtany of the devotees going in the procession carry Rags and ~ 
banners , and cerernon ial articles such as flowers, oil and incense. The y take a circuitous route ~ 
and arrive at the shrine indicated in the letter. The re they worship, offer flowers, light oil ~ 
lamps and burn incense. The messenger to Lhe gods recites Jayamari!Ialagiitha and enters the 
inner cbambe of the sbri ne and reads out the message in a loud clear voice. After this he 
, deposi ts the four copi es meant for the four guardian deities . . .. Dh$farii$fra, Virti{lha , Viuipa!qa '/ 
and Vai.fra;•ar,ia in four places. As there are no spec ial shrines dedicated to them, generally 
the four copies are hung on the fo ur sides of the bodhi Lree. The mission is now fulfilled and 
the procession returns to the parittama~zefapa . 
When ihe procession of the messenger depa rts and the sound of drum s can no longer I 
be ~.eard the mon~s in the ma~1~apa chant mahapirit and distribu te paritta wate r. When the I 
bcaung of drums is hea rd again on the return journey of the messenge r, two monks start I 
chanting Mahiisamayasutta which includes an enume ration of the Buddlla' s celestial retinue. 
When the messenge r a rri ves his feet are washed and dried at the entrance to the hall. 
A piivfu/a is sp read and he walks on it up to the entrance to the parittama~uJapa. There he stands 
at the threshold ho lding the doorpost s on either side. His attendants stand behind him clasping 
their hands :in sal utation. They are given paritta water to drink and the parirta thread to 
hold and the m11.siisaka bhik~u stand s up and asks the following question : 
" Aie there people at the entra nee to this beautifo l decorated mmglapa? ·~ 
Me<:...senger replies :-
" There arc people at the entrance to t11is beautiful a'harma maJJ<f.apa which. 
is built to resemble a celestial mansion, elegantly ciecorated by men of pure faith. 
The monk questions : 
" Has the messenger retllrncd who went to invile the great gods 1" 
Messen ger replies : 
" The messenge r to the gods who was instructed by the pious virtuous monks 
assembled in this bea ut iful ma!Jrjapa, has returned. Th e messcn~er who bad 
\ledica ted himself for this mission, and who bad prepared himself with devotion for 
seven days has fulfilled ills obliga tio11 and returned togethe r with his retinue." 
The monk questions agai n : 
"Have tl1e gods come beaded by Vai.frava{W who adorns the lotus thron e of . 
va riegated bea uty? '' 

--- Page 42 of 48 ---
! 
;I 
Messenger replies l 
" Gods have come together with their retinues to listen to the noble doctrine 
in order to gee rid of all sorrow. Gods endowed with majestic power, splendo ur and 
might, gods who dwell on mountains, plate aux and plains , and thos e residing io tbc 
atmosp here, gods of greater and lesser powers .... they have all come." 
After giving this reply, the messenger goes on to deliver the doraka<fa asna, the messa~ 
at the threshold for which be bas been specially trained. 
J)Oraka~a Asnae (Message at the Threshold) 
The full text of this message is almost impossible to translate. The rhetorical Janguaee 
is so highly ornate and the vocabu lary so pedantic and Sanskritised that it is extremely difficult 
to understand the actual message without making a pl'oper study of its text . The whole speech 
abounds in much alliteration and rhymes so 11s to create a sort of mystic glow round the message 
and the messenger as well. 
Though the text of the message :would nm into two full printed pages hs essence is that 
all gods of mighty power incl uding the four great guardfan god s have come together with their 
reti nues. 
When the messenger finishes this announcement of the ard val of the gods , the anusiisakti 
monk whose duty is to admonish the gods starts his impressive speech. Thi s is p.o sccoud to the 
former in its oratorial ostentation. 
Anusasanava' (Admonition) 
An abridged version of the admo nitio n is as follows :-
" Pious monks have chanted the Maiigalasuua preached by the Blessed One. 
of suprem e virtue, knowledge and majesty. May th e gods rejoice and shar e in the 
merit produced ~hereby . 
For seven days and seven nights faithful devotees have honoured and atten ded 
on the Buddha, Dhfimma and Sangha. May the gods rejoice and sha re in the merit 
produ ced thereby . 
Alms were offered to the monks who are direct descendants of Siiriputta and 
Moggal/iina. May the gods· rejoice and share in the meri t produ ced thereby. 
All gods in the sphere of sense pleasu res and in the sphere of form including 
Sakra , Brahma, Vi$t1U and Maheivara also must share in the .m@cit. 
All gods residing on moun tains such as Meru, Yugandhara etc. also inust • • . • : tit ~ .. 
share m the ment. , . . 
,• ··.· 
Gods presiding over the nine planets dwelling in celestial abodes in space also 
must share in the merit. 
Twenty seven gods presiding over 27 constellations .... 
Gods presiding over Sd Lanka - Vrpalavan:uz, Sumana, Kiirtik eya, Vibh~aQa 
and deities of the 4 shrines .... 
6 PSPP., p. 288 
7 ibid. D. 29(\, 
6-A 49437 

--- Page 43 of 48 ---
. 52 
· ··! ! 
. , 
Deities presidin g over Kajailgala . . . Vepulla etc. . . 
Guardians of the eight directio ns such as Indra, Soma, Agni etc . ... . 
T wenty eighi leaders of Yak~as such as lndra, Soma. VarU1Ja. Bhiiradvaja, 
Prajiipati etc . . ... 
Group deities (ga~zadevarii sucb as A-ditya, Vasu etc .. ... ) 
Hosts of bhutas (no n-human beings) such as Pu$padanta , Urvasya etc . .. .. 
All deities residing in bodhi trees, stupas, shrine rooms, villages, groves, 
monasterie s, cities. fo rests, wood lands, lakes: rivers, seas, celestia l abod es etc .... . 
Deities resi ding in huge t re~s such as banyan, rose apple. margosa etc. etc ........ . 
Deities residin g in rivers such as Gmigii, Yamuna etc ..... ... 
Goddess MaTJimekhalii of great beauty ....... 
Earth goddess ...... .. 
Goddess SarasvatI ...... .. 
Demon s head ed by Yepaci1ti... ..... 
Grea t nagas such as Sankhapa!a, Mahiikala etc ........ . 
Numerous gods resi din g i n water, land, trees , mountains etc ......... 
May all these god s mentioned above rejoice and share in the meritonous 
deed s performed and atta in to greater glory and prosp erity. Sharing in the mi::rit 
in this manner they should consider it their duty to reprimand and hold in check the 
malevolent dem ons who are ill disposed towards these devotees who have performed 
this merit ori ous deed. Let them remove all ills such as physical and mental ailments 
arisin g from unfav ourabl e planeta ry conjun ctio ns. Let them promote longevity, 
health. wealth and prosperit y. J 
If there are any stubborn malevolent demons who do not listen to the advice 
of gods , for the purp ose of bringing them under control, monks would chant the 
A/iinii/iyasutta which bas been recomme nded by the F our Great Guardian Deities 
themselves, and it can by no means be ignored by the demons. 
Guard and guide these pious devo tees. Ward off all evil befalling them from 
climatic viciss itudes, enemies, demons, wild animals, venomous snakes, unfavourab le 
planetary movement s, evil dreams, wicked omens, quarr els and hostile arguments. 
Bring them all success, prosperity and happines s." 
When this admonition is over peop le make offerings of various appropri ate articles such 
a& rob es, bowls, umbrella s, slippers, books. towels, soap etc. etc. to the monks. They also 
&how thei r appreciation of the messenger by showering various gifts on him coo. A subscription 
bowl also goes round among the devotee s and all make small contributi ons according to their 
means. 
The time is now set for the Atanii/iy asutta. Four monks seat themselves, two on either 
side with two Paritta texts and chan t the sutta. Special effort is made for distinct cnuncfatioo 
of words, and chan ting is done with grelt vigour and intonation . 
At dawn all monks assemb le in the maJJ<Japa and their entry is heralded by the beat of 
drums . They chant in chorus the mahapirita and benedictory refrain s. On e monk then conducts 
a short sermon outlining the meritorious deeds performed so far. He then ' gives ' merit by 

--- Page 44 of 48 ---
:advising the devotees to share the meri t with gods and all living creat ures, and to aspire co attain 
Nibblina in tne dispensation of the future Buddha Maitreya, after having enjo yed human and 
celestial pleasures for a long time, and never b.a.ving to suffer birth in a state of woe. 
Tho ceremony ends with the distribution of paritta water and thread as before. Usually 
the ceremony is followed by a great almsgiving and the p roceedings are the same as those 
described in connection with the all-night ceremony. 
4. <?ilrl Pirita (Paritta recited by laymen) 
Sometimes overnight paritta ceremonie s are perform ed by laymen, almost in th.o same 
manner as monks do, with of course a few minor modification s. I t 1s really a substit ute for the 
traditional tis piiye pirita chanted by monks, adapted for convenience and economic reasons. 
The gfhi pirit is quite popular in remote rura l areas where it is ver y difficult and expe nsive to 
provide transport and dweUmg facilities for monks who have to be gather ed from a number of 
.temples scattered over an exten sive area to s uffice for an overnight paritta ceremony. 
A TnalJ~apa is erected in the same manner as for the orth odox ceremony, but an indrakrla 
is never construct ed. The mJtu}.apa may be artistically decorated, or simple and austere . 
Whatever the embellishments, 1t is imp:>rtan t to have an enclosed area, demarcated at least by 
.a white cloth, drawn like a p.ir Lp:!:. I t is surmo unted with a white canop y where the traditional 
ritual accessories are hun g. lnstead of chairs, cushions or pillows are arranged inside the 
.matJrftzpa. They are covered with white sheets. The centre tabl e is of an appropriat e height. 
The casket of relics, the ola-Jeaf Paritta text and the pirit huya are replaced by a Buddha picture 
; ·or statue, a printed Paritta text and a ball of white thread resp ectively. Drum music too is 
~erally omitted. it may be employed if conveniently available. All other appurtenanoes 
:tUch as the piin ka[aya, pun kalas, lada pas mal, pahan pal a etc. are utilised. 
In the '1i!lages th.e:e a~ m..,~ whc are specially tt~ned for reciting pirit. Yot:.ng bof! 
with a good clear voice are chosen for training if they show sufficient aptitude and interest. 
Almost every village has a leader among these reciters and it is he who does the anusasana at 
the beginning of the ceremony, and the anumodanii at the end. Only elderly men p1rticipate 
in paritta ceremonies. As a rule women never take p J.rt. They aro not even p~rmittcd to step 
inside the enclosure once it is set apart for the ceremony. 
The reciters bathe and wear fresh clean white garmen ts to ensure ritual purity. They 
have ao early vegetarian dinner before the ceremony about 7.00 p.m. Fish or dry fish may be 
included in the dinner, but as a rule meat is not served. The more orthodox reciters prefer to 
forego the dinner altog ether, as such abstention marks a closer approximat ion to monastic 
conduct. 
Before entering the ~{lapa they anoint themselves with lime juice as a further pudficatory 
measure. After sitting down inside the m4f.Jr)apa, the leade r admini sters panca srla to th e reciter& 
1.and the devotees sitting around. Thereafter , the ceremony is conducted in the same manner 
1as by monks ........ the maha pirit, yuga pirit and harniira are all recited similarly. The ceremony is 
concluded with the distribution of paritta wate r and thread . A morning meal is ser ved to the 
reciters like an upiisaka dana (i.e. alms offered to lay Budd hists who have obse rved the eight 
precepts}, and it is fol.lowed by the tradi tio nal dedicat ion of merit (puniianumodanii) and thi 
'tlobte aspirat ion (patthana). 

--- Page 45 of 48 ---
REFERENCES TO LITERATURE 
ORIGINAL PAL[, SAHSKRIT AND SlNHALA SOU RCES 
Texts aml Tra nslation.:. 
Abaddhasfmavi11i$caya, ed. K. Upas ena, Colombo, 1925. 
Abltid!1ii11appadiplk6, ed. W. Subhuti, Colombo, 1921. 
Abhidhii11appadipika Sanna, T. Paiiiiiirnoli T1ssa, S!ltyasamuc;a ya Print ing Press, (C..>!O:n)o), 18.15. 
Aitarcya Brli/1ma1in of the !J.gveda, tr. M. Haug, 2 vok, Bon1Jay. 1863. 
Ajitagama, e<l. N. R. Bhatr, 2 voh.. Pondicherry, I 964 - l967. 
Amarakosa, ed. H. T. Colebrooke. Calcutta , 1807. 
Allekortha Ti/aka of Mahipa, ed. M. M. Pa tkar, Poona . 19-1-7. 
A1ig111tara11ikiiya, eu. R. MOLris and E. HarJ y, 5 vols .. PT.S .. London . 1885 - 190'J. 
Alig11ttara11ikiiya Afllwkathii Ma11orathap1ira11r, ed. M. Walleser and H. Kop p, 5 vols., PT.S .. London , 
1924-L956. 
Alwttitii, tr. K. T. Telang , SBE., vol. 8, Oxford , 1908. 
Apadrnw, ed. M. E. Lilley. 2 vols .. PTS., Lo:idon, 1925-192.7. 
Apadiina A(f/ia/catlu'i Vis11ddhajmwvilasinf, ed . C. E. Ood:iku mbur.1. PTS., Londou , L954. 
Apastambha Dhar ma Siitra, tr. George DUhler. Sacrad Laws of rl1f! Aryas, pt. I , S..BE., vol. 2. Oxford 1879. 
Apastambha Grhya S1i1ra, tr. H. Oldenberg, Tnr Gri/lya Surrar. pl. ll. SS E., vol. 30. Oxford. 1892. 
Architecture of Mfi11astira, tr. P. IC. A;ha rya O .U.P .. 1933. 
Arlmrvaveda, tr. M. Bloomfield, HJ"" 11 of rile A111arvavada, SBE., vol. 42. Oxford. 1897. 
Atthasiilini, .Dhammasmiga11i Af!ha;;af!lii. ed. E. [vfilller, PTS., London. 1897. 
A1i.tadlra M11ktiiharaya, ed. D . K. Fonseka, Surlarsann Yantralay a. Colombo. 1893. 
A11ad1i1wAataka, ed. J. S. Speyer,'.! vols .. St. Pete rsber g, 1902, 1906. 
Ba11dluiya11a Dharmaiiistra, rr. G. i:Unl!:. Sacred L'lws of thr Aryas. pr. H. SBE., vol. 14, Oxfo rd. 1832. 
Bhagava ta PurfuJa, Srimad .Bhagav:rram. d. and tr. A. C. Bbakriveia nt:i Swami, D~lhi , 1962 . 
.Bhavi$ya Purfi:;a , ed. K. Srikrsnadas:i. I :J.59. 
Brihat Sa111hitii, ed. V. S. Sastri. tr. V. S. 5:istri and M. R. Bhatt, 2 vok. Bangalore City, 1947. 
B11d11g1111a A.larikiir aya, ed. D . B. Jayatilaka, Colombo , 1922. 
But~·ara1.1a, ed. M. Nanananda, Colom bo. 1929. 
Carakasa111hiti1 by Agnive§a, ed. Vaidya J. T. Achiirya, 3rd ed., Bombay, 1914. 
Cat11bhW,1aviira AJ/hakatlui Sfirat1/uzsamuccay11, erl. D. N!i~asena, Colombo, 1927. 
Ciz ~11dogya Upcmi$ad, tr. E. Mn .. M'iil!er TltP [Jpani~ads. ot. I. SSE.. vol. 1, 0 1tford, 1879. 
Cimya iigama, Quoted Li. Somasambhup:d:i!iati. vol. If. ed. Helen·~ .Brunner b.ch':lux, P.:i.ili ;nerr f, 1963. 
Cii/ava111sa, ed. W. Geiger, 2 vols., PTS., London, 1925. 
Daham Sara11a, ed. K. D. Dhanunananda , Colo mbo, 1929. 
Da(adii S irita, ed. V. R atnasuriya, CJ!ombo, 1949. 
Dasajcuakakcrthaw1stuva, ed. G unanan cfa, Colombo , l 928. 
Dhammapada, ed. S. Suman.gala , PTS., O.U.P., 1914. 
Dhammapad,; A!/hakathii, ed. H. C. :--lorman, 4 vols .. PTS .. L-0ndon , 1914. 
JJ/iamp ~va A/:1110 Giifapadaya, ed . .D. H. Jayatilaka, Colombo, 1932. 
Dluituva'flsayu, ed. D . Sumcdhankara , Colombo, 1923. 
Dig/11mikriya, ed. T. W. Rbys D avids and J. E. Carpznter , :.11 vols., PTS., London , 1890·1911. Tr. T. W, 
and C. A. F. Rhys Davids. Dialog11e11 "fri;e 1Jud:t:1:r. 3 vols., SBB .. vol:>. 2. 3 a!ld 4, O.U.P., London, 
I 8:19·1921. 
Dighanikiiya Atthakath6, Su111:111ga/avi/fis111i. d . T. W. Rnys D;ivids and J. E. Carp~nlcr , 3 vois., PTS. 
Lundon, 1886.1932. 
Dighanikiiya A!!ltakat!iii Tiful. ed. L. eh: Silva , 3 vols .. I'TS.., London, 1970. 
Di1'yti1•tui!i11a, ed. E. B. Cowel l and !l. A. "eil, Cimbri.Jge. 1886. 
Fa-hieu A Record of B11ddltis1 Ki11g&Jm~. er Jam)' L'::fl;.~.:. Oxford. UlSG. Tlzc Travc/s of Fa·Hic11, fr. 
H. A. Giles, O.U.P., J923 . 
Ga!J(la1'_J"1i/1(1. ed. Susuki and ldzumi, Kyoto. 193-l-l936. 
Gohliila Grhya Sii1ra. tr. H. Old~nber~. Til~ Orihy..: Sur:w, pt. H. SHE., vol. 30. Oxford, I 892. 
Gu11i/a;:ifrya Dip1111!. ed. D. C. Disa nayaka, Colombo . 19.57. 
169 

--- Page 46 of 48 ---
i/O 
1-[a/'{lsa Swuleiaya, <ld. C. S. Godakumburc, Colo•n i,o, l953 . 
{{ira11yak1til Grhyrr Sr/Im, tr. H. l)l:C.e1'nr ~ . The Gl'i'1v1 S•itrar, p l. IT, S3 E., vo l. 30, O.dord , 1892. 
JicakatrhavtlMtmii, ed. V. fo::iusboll, 6 vols. and [n J~ <c. P rs .. London , LS95 l907. 
}.°lidmnbar f, ( Parvabhaga) et!. M. R. Kale, Bombay, 19 l4. 
1ranJc/raviwrn1Ji, ed. D . A. L. Maskell , PTS., Lo:i.~lon, I Y56. 
K!ipum Sir<L~apiideyn salw .\lf'i!1ilquila S.intiya. pt. [ and H. Uth e:i., Colo mbo, 1929. 
KiisyapasaJ11lritti (or Vriddliajlva.l;tva Ta111ra) e:I. Vaidya I. r . .\drlrya a·d S. Sanui, N~p1I .'h ns!crit Series 
No. 1, Jlombay, 1938. 
Kathiisarltsiigartt, tr. C. H. Tawney, Tile Oce:m of St:Jry, LO vols., ed. 'l. M. Pen1.er, Lon don, I ll24. 
Ka.tik1ivat Sw1gani , ~d. D . R. layati laka. Kdani ya (Ceylon) . 1 922. 
Kau\ilya , lt rr!iasastra of l(a11ti!y:1. tr. R. Shama sash·y, 7th ed .. Myso re, 1961. 
Khuddakapdfha togerfler wit/1 /Is Cl)mme•1tar}' Para111a11'1ajotikii l, e:l. H. S·nlth, PTS ., London, 19 l 5 . 
lr. N anarnoli, M inor Rc1d ing~ .1nd lllmtnro r. PTS., Lonjon, I 960. 
Ku!tir(lara Tn11tm, fatrotl uc!iou, J. Wo;i:irolfe, R~.ding ;. \f.P . ?aadit, an~r Skt. te~t, T. Vitlya ratna, Madras, 
1965. 
Lalitavistara, ed. S. Lefmann, Ha.lie, 1902. 
,\fa!iiibluirara, ed. V, S. Suktha nkar. S. re. B~'val kar :ind P. L. Vaidya , 130R.I., Poo ua. l966. 
1vfa!ri:ib!tcirata, tr. P. C. Roy, T/le \1fa!uihharata, vols., Calct lt!a, 1956. 
\1a!ulhurll1Naq1sa, ed. S. Ar thu r Stro-ng, PTS. , Lond on, l89 1. 
\1r!hiihudhivamsa Grc111thipad~1vivt1ra11aya, ed. R. S. D :1armva:n 1, Sa lyasamui::caya Press, 1910. 
J1aiiiivarnra. ed. W . Geiger , PTS., Lo:1do11. 1908 • 
.\-fa'rii•'nJtll, ed. E. SenarL 3 vols .. Paris. l882. 1390. 1897. 
;,,{a/iliima11iktiva. ed. V. Trcnkner anj a. C'u!:u!rs. J vols .. Pf.S .. L-0mb!l, 1~3 - 1951. Tr. I. B. Home r 
'.,tfifillle Le11gtli Sayings. 3 vols., PTS., Londm1. 1954 - 1959. 
'vfa.ijltimanikdya A!!lzakachii, J>apt11tccistida11i. e.:i. J. H. '.Voods, D. Kosam'Ji and L B. 1-(omer, 5 vols., PTS., 
London. L922 - 1938. 
c'vfi111usmttl, tr . G. 13Uhlcr , Tlte La ws of !vfanu , SBE., vol. 25, Oxford, 1886. 
Milfiu/af)anlla. ed. V. Trenkner , 1,>TS., London, 1928 . 
.t1i11Jtfaka Upa114·ad, t r. F. Max Muller, The Upanisads, pt. ll, SBE., vo L 15, Oxford, 1884. 
Jlfuvadevdfivata, ed. D. G. Ab:iyagun1 ralna, ColO"m':lo, 1923. 
Niima/i1igrin11.tiisana (Amarakosha) with the Commenta ry (Vyakhyas udh a or R am'Hrami) of Bhanuji 
Dikshit, ed. Pandit Sivada tta, 4th ed., revised by W. L. S. Pansikar, Bombay, 1915. 
Niiradasmrli, tr. J. J ullys Minor Law Books, pt. (,S SE., vol. 33, Oxford, 1889. 
Nettippa kara{1a Atfhakmliii , cJ. W. Piyatissa, Colcnnbo, 1921. 
Nir wi~1apura Var(1aruiva, ed. Dias, Colo mbo, 1926. 
Piili mutta ka Vi11ayaviniccltaya, ed. 'P. NO.IJ.avim:ila, Paoatlura (Ceylon), B.E. 2450 . 
Pali Sim/iaia Pirit Pota. ed. K. PrajiHisara, Colombo , 1956. 
Pail.cikii Pradlpa, ed. R. S. D!la ·:n'.lram1 . Colombo, 1896. 
Piirmikura Grhya Stitra. tr. H. O!.:lc:aberg, Tile Grihya Siirras. pt. l, SB E., vol. 29. O'Cford, !886. 
Pams11rama Kafpas1itra, ed. '\. \•!. <ia-;tri. 2utl ~d. S. Y.S. Dive. '}:iekwa ri Ori~ nta l S!rie> 'lo. '(l({l, Biroda, 
1950. 
l'afiswnbhi d(imagga •lffhakllthii , d. M. D. 3. fin:i.r,Hn 1. 'vl. D. S. A:10 na:lassi and W. S.)l'ata, Colombo, 
1927. 
Periynp11ni(I01>1, C11itib1tore Ta:nil S1ngru edition. C0n·11e;ita ry by C. K. Subra1 1ania Muth aliynr. pt. 6 , 
Coin bato re. 1969. 
Petavart/111, ed. M laayelf, PTS., l~onJ;rn, 13.SS. 
Pew vmthu -l.f!ha1<athiL Para·mm:1:1dip.mf. ei E. Ha rdy. PTS .. O.U. P., l894. 
Piyummal.i, 5Ce R 1v.in:n ila. 
Prayog:1ra111a1•.:tli. ed. K . Nn111vun11tL. Co!o:n ':m . . l 943. 
Prh!ciples of Tc1ntra (Tam ra Tc1111•a), ed . Arthur -\ valon (J. WooJ ro(fe), 3rd ed., Vl.ldras, !960. 
Plljiivallyn. ed. K. N ii.l)avirnl la, Colo mbo. 1965. 
Pr1r<i(tr1 .V<im<ivo/i.ra. ed . H. !:t ;1ati l:1k~ .\pp nhamy, Colnmbo, 1882. 
P11rii!1a Pii1•1pcm01·ata, ed. B. 1)'1nmmar.itam .. Cvlombo, 191.+. 
Riijm1ip,,r111111 rnfiito Dl1011ramaril't1·.Viglt'.lnf:1, ed. N:irn;':lna $ar.11a, Anandusra~,1 a sarpskrta gra11thilvali, 
'.'lo. J3, ~nan :I<• '.ramam\ldr.tl)u 'nyn, 1925. 
!M111iiyn11a, tr. !l. T. H. GrHlith. Tire iW111arana ,,i VtilmikT. L<mdon, L8i0.1&73. 
Rasavii//ini, ed . Samua rissa, 2 pls., C•Jlomhn. 1923. 

--- Page 47 of 48 ---
.Rm1rallligama. ed. ~~. R. Bhat t, Pond icberry, 1961. 
f!.gveda, tr. R. T. H . G riffith. Tiu: Hymm rif the Ri.i:rveda. 4 vols., Benares, 1882-1892. 
Ruvanmala salta Piyumma/u, ed. Eatu vantudave, Colombo. 1892. 
Suddharmri/a1ikoraya, ed. M. Piyaratana , Colombo, 1971. 
Sadti/1armapu(1(larika, tr. H. Kem, The Lotus of rhe True La•v, SilE., vol. 21, Oxford, 1909. 
Saddharma Ramiikarnya, ed. K. L. Dbarmalci rti, Co ombo, 1912. 
Saddhanna Rntnavaliya, ed. D. U. Jayatilaka, Co lombo, 19 2 ~ . 
Siidl111carirodaya, ed. B. Uparatan a , Maradana (Ceylon ), 2505/1961. 
Samyurumikiiya, ed. L. Fecr, 5 vois. and Index, l'TS .. London, 1884 -1904. 
Sanatsujiitiya, tr. K. T. Telaag , SBE., vo. 8, Oxfo rd, 1908 . 
Sm1ga Sarwza, ed. K. D. Dharmananda, Colombo, 1929. 
Saligharti}a Siid/111 Cariyiiv11, ed. H. Piyanantla, Colombo. 1954. 
171 
Smigiraramcikara of S<1rmif:ad!11•a. ed. S. Subrahma aya SastrJ, The Adyar Library Series No. 30, Madras 
1943. 
Sii1ikhiiya11a Grhya Slitra, tr. H. Oldenberg. Tiie Gri!rya Stirrns. pt. I. SUE. vol. 29, Oxford , 1886. 
So1ikJraya11a Srauras1irra. tr. W. Caland, Sara~-vac :- vihara Series, vol. 32, Nagpur, 1953. 
Siiratrhadtpani, ed. B. Devarakkhita, Colombo, 1914. 
Sarapatha .Briih ma~1a, t;. J. Egg::ling, Tile Sarapatlra Bm'1•r1fll1a, 5 pts., SB!:'. vuls. I:!. 26, 41, &3. 44, Oxford 
1882-1900. 
Simiinayadappana, ed. S. Dhammalankara , Colombo, 1&82. 
Si111hala JJodlriva1µsaya. ed. B. K. Dhammaratana. We1igama (Ceylo n), 1929. 
Snelta Satakaya ltevar Beitel ref pora, 4th ed., Malara (Cey lon), 1928. 
Somarambhupaddhati, ed_ Helene Brunner- Laehaux. 2 pts., Pondiehery , 1968. 
Sraurako~a. Vaidika Sarpasodhana Ma1>c;laln, Poon a, 1958. 
Surtan[nfira, ed. D . Andrcson and H. Smith, PTS., L-0ndon, 1948. 
S1111a11ipara A!lftakarM . Paramatrhajorikii. ed. H. Smith, 3 vols., PTS .. London, 1916-1 918. 
Sriyagatfa11r, ed. P. L. Vaidya, Bombay , l<)~S . 
Tautiriya Upa11i,1Ud, lr. F. ~ ... r.u; M!i!!er, 'I:; f! Upa::isads. p!. .!.!, SBE. vol. !5, Oxford , 18!!4. 
Them a111l TherigiitltO, ed. H. Oldenbcrg and R . .Pischet, PTS., London, 1883. 
Themgiitllii At//1<1kar/iii, Paramarthadfpani, ed. F . L. Woodward, 3 vols .. PTS., London, 1940, 1952, 1959. 
Therigiithii A{{hakathii, Paramc111J:adlpa11i, ed. E. rti.uller, PTS., London, 1893. 
Thlipava111saya. ed. G. P. Sarana nkara, Colom!)('!. 1955. 
Udii11a Al/hakathii, Parama11lladipa11i, ed. F. L. Woodward, PTS., O .U.P., 1926. 
Udiina,·arga, ed. N . P. Cbakravarti, Paris. 19'.lO. 
Vaidya Cimiimai1t Bl:af$afya Saiigralta. ed. K. Niinavimala , Gampaha (Ceylon ). 
Va<}.igatantraya, pt.1. revised b) K. D. E de Silva, Kegalla (Ceylon). 1938. 
Va111sattliappakcisi11l, ed. G. P. t-.falalase-kera. 2 vols., PTS., O.U.P ., 1935. 
Vibhmiga, ed. C.A.F .Rhys Davids, PTS., London, 11104. 
Vibhaliga Af!hakarhti, Sa111111ohm•i11odim, ed. A.. P. Buddbadatta , PTS., Londo n, 1923. 
Vimiinavatthu A/fhakathii, Paramartlwdipa11i, ed. E. Har dy. PTS., O.U .P., 1901. 
Vi11aya Pi/aka, ed. H. Oldcnberg , 5 vols., London , 1879-1883. Tr. I . B. Homer, Book of'th <J Discipline, 
5 pts., SBB., vols. X, XI, XIII, XIV, XX, London, 1938·1952. 
Vinaya Arthakathil , Samantaptisadikii, e<l. T. B. :Iome r, 7 vols.. PTS., London, 1924-1947. 
Vi11ay<1tt'1amm1j11sii, ed. U. P. Ekanayalca. Colom bo, 19!2 . 
Vinaya1•i11icchoya, ed. D . Dha.rmaraks ita, Colombo. 1937. 
Vi.rudclhimagga, ed. C. A. F. R hys David s. 2 vols., PTS., London , 19:20-1921. 
Ycijttav(l/kyasmrri with the Commentary oi Viji\!\ne5var.i call ed Mitak$a ra, tr. R. B. S. C. \lidyamave, 
Sacred Books of the Hindu s, vol. 21. Allahabad (Jndia) 1918. 
Yogara111iikaraya, ed. no1 given, Sri Lankonaya Press, Colombo, 1907. 

--- Page 48 of 48 ---
172 
SECONDARY AUTH ORTTIES 
Reference Books 
Ancient l11dia, Bulletin of the Archaeological Su rvey ofla dia, No. 16, 1960, New Delhi, 1962. 
A rchaeological Survey of Cey/011, Annual Reports, 1903. 1911·J2. 1949, Colombo. 
Archaeological Survey of India, Ann11t1l Repons, 1915-1916. 
Buddltist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar a11d Dictionary , ed. F. Edgerton, 2 vols., New Haven , 1953. 
Ceylon Sessional Papers, 1915, Colombo. 
A Classical Dictionary of Hindu Myt!tology and Religion. Geography, fllstory and Literature , ed. John 
Dowson, Trubner' s Oriental Series, 7th ed., Routledge. 1950. 
Des tya Vaidya .5abda Kosaya. ed. K. Nfu)aviraala, Colomb o, 1969. 
A Dictionary of Hi11d11 Architecture, ed. P. K. Acbary a, O.U.P ., 1927. 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, ed. James Hastings, Edinbur gh, lst ed., 1908, 2nd ed., 1925. 
Encyclopaedia of Superstitions, ed. E. and M.A. Radford, Dufor, 1961, rev. ed. 
Epigraphica Zey/a nica (Ceylon Archaeological Survey} Colombo. 
An hulex ro the Names of Maht:ibltiirata, ed. S. Soren sen, London, 1904, reprinted by f"vtotilaJ Banarsidass , 
1963. 
Sabdakalpadmma, ed. R. Radhakaatadeva , Chowkhamb a Saskri t Series Work No. 93, Varanasi - I (India), 
1961. 
Sabdiirr!ra Ratmikara ya, ed. B. Revara , Colomb o, 1929. 
Sa11skr/1-E11g/islr Diclio11ary, ed. M. Monier Williams , O.U.P., London, 1960. 
Sharrer Si11halese·E11gl1'.r!t Dicrionary, ed. M. D. Ratnasuriya and P. B. F. Wijeratna, Colombo. 1949. 
Sinlralese-Englislt Dictionary, ed. A. Mendis Gunasekera , Balapitiya (Ceylon), 1915. 
S rf Saddltarma J(o,raya, ed. A. ::vtendis Gunasekera. Colombo , 1925. 
Tamil Lexicon, Published under the authority of the University of Yladms, Diocesan Press, Madras 
1924- 1939. 
Vacaspatyam, ed. Taranatha Tarkavacaspati, Chowkbamba Sansk rit Series, Work ~o. 94, Varanasi -1 
Cnclia), 1962. 
Monogr..pils ·.md Articles 
A.en!, V. M.-
1939-Sociol and Religious Life in the Grhyasiitras, Ahmedabad llndia). 
ARIYA PALA, M. B.-
1956- Soclety in Mediaeval Ceylon, Colombo. 
AUBOY ER, J.-
1965- Da//y Life /11 Anciem fndia, from approximalelv 200 B. C. to A. D. 700. Tr. Crom French by 
S. W. Taylor Daily Lifo Series, London. 
BAKn, A.-
J969-Music in India . in T!teNewOxfordHistoryof M11.~lc,A11cie11 t andOrlental M11sic,ed.Bgon Wellesz 
Oxford. 
DARN liTl', L. D.-
19-17-Al pJrabnica/ Guide to Sinhalese Folklore from Ballad Sources, Bombay. 
BAR.Rl!TI", D.-
J 954-S<lllptllres from Amaravati in the British Museum, Londor . 
BASHAM, A. L.-
1954-Womkr tltar was India. London. 
lh:u., B. C. P.-
1892- Reporr 0 11 tire Kegafle District of the Province of Sabarag.m1uva, Ceylon Arcbaeological Survey XD\ 
1892. Colombo. 